[Amit Varma]: Iris Murdoch once said, quote, Love is the extremely difficult realisation that something
[Amit Varma]: other than oneself is real, stop quote. I won't pontificate on love here, but I like
[Amit Varma]: the phrasing of something other than oneself is real. If you've heard recent episodes
[Amit Varma]: of the show, you might have heard me musing about our tendency to treat all other people
[Amit Varma]: like minor characters in a play or props in a scene in which we are the star and everyone
[Amit Varma]: else is there just to fulfil this function or that role. I think about this more and
[Amit Varma]: more these days, how reflexive it is to behave like the centre of the universe. And while
[Amit Varma]: this is something I grapple with at an individual level, where I try to be mindful of treating
[Amit Varma]: people as well, actual people. This is also something that plays out between groups. And
[Amit Varma]: indeed, if you look at how men have treated women through the ages, you'll find that
[Amit Varma]: a lot of it is based on function. Women have been forced into different roles and stereotypes.
[Amit Varma]: And anything outside of that has been treated as surplus to requirement. And at one level,
[Amit Varma]: the roles women have been pushed into may seem to fall between the extremes of those
[Amit Varma]: cliches of the whore and the Madonna. A book called Intimate City written by my guest today
[Amit Varma]: shows that in some ways, those extremes are not opposites, but even the same thing. For
[Amit Varma]: example, both sex workers and housewives are assumed to have given their consent away once
[Amit Varma]: they choose those roles. Marital rape is still not considered a crime in India. And lawyers
[Amit Varma]: have argued in court that the rape of a sex worker cannot be a big deal because well,
[Amit Varma]: they're used to sex as sex workers. In a different context, my guest spoke about how at different
[Amit Varma]: points in time, quote, life outside marriage or prostitution has been impossible for women.
[Amit Varma]: Stop good. You'll have to listen to this full conversation to hear the full argument. But
[Amit Varma]: for now, I'll share a third commonality between a sex worker and a housewife, as they have
[Amit Varma]: typically existed, that they are both instrumental to the needs of the men in their lives, their
[Amit Varma]: autonomy, their personal needs and desires. The interior lives don't matter. They fulfill
[Amit Varma]: a role. That's all that matters. And I think you'll agree with me that to reduce human
[Amit Varma]: beings to this is a terrible crime. And we do it in many contexts other than this.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen. Our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Amit Varma]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Bharma. Welcome to the scene and the unseen. My guest
[Amit Varma]: today is a sociologist Manjima Bhattacharya, author of a book called Intimate City, which
[Amit Varma]: I loved and recommend to all of you. Intimate City is about the changing face of sex work
[Amit Varma]: across the world. And in India, it looks at how globalization and technology have transformed
[Amit Varma]: sex work. And I found many things here in common with the way the creator economy has
[Amit Varma]: evolved. The book also takes a close look at the way in which feminism has evolved in
[Amit Varma]: how it looks at sex work. At first, appalled by the objectification and the presumed lack
[Amit Varma]: of consent, but later accepting that all sex work does not arise out of trafficking. And
[Amit Varma]: sometimes women exercise their agency in choosing sex work over other available ways to make
[Amit Varma]: a living. At first, I thought this episode would be mainly about this book, and perhaps
[Amit Varma]: touch on Manjima's previous book, Manequin, which looked at the women who worked in India's
[Amit Varma]: glamour industry. But as we got talking, I got more and more fascinated by Manjima's
[Amit Varma]: journey into feminism, activism, sociology, and just by the way her thinking evolved with
[Amit Varma]: all the work and the writing she did. So the first half of this episode is about her journey
[Amit Varma]: as a feminist. And then we talk about the changing face of sex work. There are many
[Amit Varma]: sharp insights in this conversation. And while listening to the edit, I found myself forced
[Amit Varma]: to stop and process some of them. I think you'll enjoy it as well. But before we get
[Amit Varma]: there, let's take a quick commercial break. Do you want to read more? I've put in a lot
[Amit Varma]: of work in recent years in building a reading habit. This means that I read more books,
[Amit Varma]: but I also read more long form articles and essays. There's a world of knowledge available
[Amit Varma]: through the internet. But the problem we all face is how do we navigate this knowledge?
[Amit Varma]: How do we know what to read? How do we put the right incentives in place? Well, I discovered
[Amit Varma]: one way. A couple of friends of mine run this awesome company called CTQ Compounds at ctqcompounds.com.
[Amit Varma]: Which aims to help people up level themselves by reading more. A few months ago, I signed
[Amit Varma]: up for one of their programs called the Daily Reader. Every day for six months, they sent
[Amit Varma]: me a long form article to read. The subjects covered went from machine learning to mythology
[Amit Varma]: to mental models and marmalade. This helped me build a habit of reading. At the end of
[Amit Varma]: every day, I understood the world a little better than I did before. So if you want to
[Amit Varma]: build your reading habit, head on over to CTQ Compounds and check out their Daily Reader.
[Amit Varma]: New batches start every month. They also have a great program called Future Stack, which
[Amit Varma]: helps you stay up to date with ideas, skills, and mental models that will help you stay
[Amit Varma]: relevant in the future. Future Stack batches start every Saturday. What's more, you get
[Amit Varma]: a discount of a whopping 2,500 rupees 2,500 if you use the discount code UNSEEN. So head
[Amit Varma]: on over to CTQ Compounds at ctqcompounds.com and use the code UNSEEN. Uplevel yourself.
[Amit Varma]: Manjima, welcome to the scene in the unseen. Thank you, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, before we start, and I've completely been fascinated by the sort of work you've
[Amit Varma]: done and both your books, Manequin and Intimacy, particularly Intimacy, because in so many
[Amit Varma]: ways, the changes that are reflected in that book are changes, I think taking place not
[Amit Varma]: just in that industry, or not just regarding sexual relations, but pretty much all around
[Amit Varma]: us in many different ways. But before we get to kind of talking about that, I'm keen on
[Amit Varma]: knowing more about you, like, where did you grow up? You know, what was your childhood
[Guest]: like?
[Guest]: This is one of those very difficult questions to answer, as always. And I'm glad you have
[Guest]: a long interview lined up for it. I grew up in the Middle East in Kuwait. I was born in
[Guest]: a place called Dig Boy in Assam. And it's a really interesting name, because they say
[Guest]: the legend goes that British person said, Dig Boy, and they dug and they found oil.
[Guest]: And so, you know, it was one of those oil townships that I was born in. And from there,
[Guest]: in the 80s, in 80, actually, there was a flight of many engineers when the conflict started
[Guest]: in Assam, actually, that a lot of people moved to the Middle East, because the oil industry
[Guest]: there was booming at the time. So my father was part of that flight. And so I grew up
[Guest]: through the 80s, I lived in Kuwait. And until the first Gulf War 1990, which is when Saddam
[Guest]: Hussein invaded Kuwait. So till then, I grew up in Kuwait, a life of a quiet life, a very
[Guest]: an expat life, one would say, very conscious of being South Asian. So the South Asian community
[Guest]: was really close. I think it was very unusual. I mean, there is the universal experience
[Guest]: of the NRI, which you see in Jhumpa Lahiri's novels and so on. So that emotional thread
[Guest]: was very much there in our lives of being away from home and so on. But it was also
[Guest]: very distinct because the Gulf is a very different place. It is, you know, there's no lot of
[Guest]: people talk about being from small towns versus being from big cities. But in the Middle East
[Guest]: or in Kuwait, at least, it wasn't like that. There was no small town and there was no big
[Guest]: city. There was only one big city, Kuwait City, which is the capital. Otherwise, there
[Guest]: was small townships, like there was housing societies in a sense, you know, localities
[Guest]: where you stayed. So you never felt, you know, there was neither the small town nor was there
[Guest]: a big city. So your community was for us, it was the Bengali, the Bengalis create a
[Guest]: cultural society wherever they go. So the Bengali cultural society was basically, I
[Guest]: would say, the community that we were part of. And then there was school and it was very,
[Guest]: if I were to put a color to it, it was a very sandy, sort of a yellow, dusty brown, serene
[Guest]: sort of a landscape. And then there's the blue of the sea. And it was very, very quiet,
[Guest]: almost as quiet as this room, even quieter than this room that we're sitting in. And
[Guest]: I mean, the only only the hum of the AC. So it was a very quiet life and one with a rhythm
[Guest]: of its own going to school. And I went to an English school and we had, you know, it
[Guest]: was sort of you went to play in the desert kind of area. We had small sheds where libraries
[Guest]: were there. I was chief librarian at age nine or something. Yeah, it was quite idyllic in
[Guest]: its own way, but very specific to to a certain group of people who lived in Kuwait in the
[Guest]: 80s. I'm sure people who live in Kuwait now would not have the same experience. I think
[Guest]: the South Asian identity was also very important. Bollywood was a big influence. That's how
[Guest]: we connected to India. That's how I learned Hindi. I mean, you know, we had in our building
[Guest]: there was a culture of videocassette borrowing. So and there was also a culture of really
[Guest]: stretching your, you know, whatever you paid. So if one family hired a videocassette for
[Guest]: a week, everybody in the building had to watch that because, you know, that's the only way
[Guest]: that we would be in solidarity with one another. But it was also actually fun. So that one
[Guest]: video would traverse every single flat in that building. And so in that, so I've watched
[Guest]: all kinds of rubbish through the 80s. But it was it had a function of connecting us
[Guest]: to each other and also to connect us to back home. The second phase, I would say I was
[Guest]: Delhi actually, which is where I went after the first Gulf War, then after the invasion.
[Guest]: And that was then exciting. You know, you're in your teens. This is Delhi, which is Delhi
[Guest]: in the 90s. Very disposed globalization, India, you have channels, TV channels of all kinds
[Guest]: and you know, the really changing landscape. But still something about, you know, Delhi
[Guest]: doesn't change also still, even in that time. So then finished school there, I finished
[Guest]: college, I went to, you know, I did my post grad there, etc. And then moved to Bombay
[Guest]: in the mid 2000s, 2007. And since then, I've been living here. In the middle one, for one
[Guest]: year I lived in Geneva, which was a brief foray into really working with an international
[Guest]: organization called WILF. It was one of the first women's organizations in the world.
[Guest]: 1916, it was started after the First World War to sort of make sure women have a seat
[Guest]: at the peace negotiations. And it was a really good experience. It was a year in WILF's office
[Guest]: in Geneva and where a lot of the work was really being at the United Nations office
[Guest]: and monitoring all kinds of gender related issues. So, have I gone off your question
[Guest]: completely?
[Amit Varma]: No, this is lovely. These are the kind of sort of, you've given me many things to double
[Amit Varma]: click on. And it's kind of lovely for that reason. And one of them that strikes me is
[Amit Varma]: this that you described these specific things about Kuwait, like it was so silent and you
[Amit Varma]: know, the colors sandy and sandy slash brown and the sea was blue and all that. And I remembered
[Amit Varma]: this scene from a scene from a film I saw in my childhood, Steven Spielberg's Empire
[Amit Varma]: of the Sun, where, and I've completely forgotten the plot, I've forgotten everything about
[Amit Varma]: it. But I remember there's a scene where there's this kid at a dining table, I think it's a
[Amit Varma]: kid and the house is being emptied because they're moving away. And everything is silent,
[Amit Varma]: right? This complete silent on the screen. And then suddenly it becomes more silent.
[Amit Varma]: And it becomes more silent because I've taken the clock down. So the tick tick which you
[Amit Varma]: had normalized of the clock, that's gone. And that's when you realize that the clock
[Amit Varma]: was there, even though it was there earlier, but that's when you notice it. And I'm thinking
[Amit Varma]: that these impressions that therefore that you have of Kuwait that it was so silent and
[Amit Varma]: this was the color, are these things that you thought about in retrospect, because at
[Amit Varma]: the time, I'm guessing would not have had a frame of reference to compare it with, like
[Amit Varma]: the hustle bustle of Bombay or, you know, the sounds of Delhi and you know, those reference
[Amit Varma]: points wouldn't have been there. And so is this something that you've kind of done looking
[Amit Varma]: back? And is that looking back something that, you know, you do once in a while, like in
[Amit Varma]: the sense that I often think about how non self aware I was at that time. So whatever
[Amit Varma]: awareness I have of myself as a person in that time as a boy, almost like you're looking
[Amit Varma]: through a prism when you're looking at someone else, right? Is that awareness was not there
[Amit Varma]: in that boy then that that's it's kind of looking back that you're aware of what was
[Amit Varma]: going on. So, you know, so when has it come through looking back and when you look back
[Amit Varma]: at yourself in Kuwait and the texture of your days and what are you doing and all of that?
[Amit Varma]: What do you feel?
[Guest]: It's an interesting question. I'm not sure it's entirely in retrospect. I think even
[Guest]: at that time, you know, we would come on holiday to India maybe once in two years and and it
[Guest]: was really it's one of the most obvious sort of experiences, right? Also, I feel it's interesting
[Guest]: you mentioned the clock because I mean, I have had to make my dad take off the wall,
[Guest]: the clock in in a bedroom when I once went to stay over at their place because the ticking
[Guest]: of a clock sounds really loud to me to me. So it was both I would say it's you know,
[Guest]: we realized it while growing up that this was silent and it was a it was now I realized
[Guest]: it was a luxury, you know, in in in the context of living in Bombay, particularly. So part
[Guest]: of it is when you think back and it may be these are the things that you know, these
[Guest]: are the cherries on top that you're actually remembering. So you're not remembering the
[Guest]: other kinds of cacophony or problems that may have been there. But, you know, that's
[Guest]: the the pleasant taste that you want to carry with you that you're actually, you know, emulsifying
[Amit Varma]: in a sense in your mind.
[Amit Varma]: Like the other strand I've also want to explore in this is that whole thing of video cassettes
[Amit Varma]: being passed around in one family as a video cassette, everyone watches it in a week. And
[Amit Varma]: that's, you know, familiar, because it was like that for everyone here as well. Obviously,
[Amit Varma]: there's a scarcity of things as scarcity of entertainment, you can't, there's no smartphone
[Amit Varma]: that you can whip out and watch what you want. So you know, if like Doordarshan would show
[Amit Varma]: one foreign film a week at 10pm at night or whatever. So, you know, there's this people
[Amit Varma]: like to say that in which Annie gives it those ones, Pradeep Kishan film, which Arundhati
[Amit Varma]: Roy wrote, it aired only once on Doordarshan. But the fact is, everybody from my generation
[Amit Varma]: saw it that one time that it aired, right? Because that was the only thing that you had
[Amit Varma]: to look forward to. And now when I look back on that, it's interesting. And I don't know
[Amit Varma]: if I can put a finger on it. But here's the thing, we are obviously shaped by all these
[Amit Varma]: influences when we are children, it's the people around us, the little communities,
[Amit Varma]: they might be part of or we might be part of and so on. And the films we watch the books
[Amit Varma]: we read, and so on and so forth. And in those days, a lot of that reading was indiscriminate,
[Amit Varma]: you read whatever you could get your hands on and so on and so forth, ditto with films.
[Amit Varma]: And a lot of it was also cliched, because you'd have the same set of reading kind of
[Amit Varma]: go around all kids would read and Ed Blighton and Hardy Boys and then, you know, get a little
[Amit Varma]: older and read another set of books, Woodhouse and so on. Similarly, with, you know, with
[Amit Varma]: music, you know, you'd go to college and it would be the same rites of ritual, the same
[Amit Varma]: 70s classic rock and all of that would kind of happen. So in that sense, there is this
[Amit Varma]: common layer that binds all of us in a manner of speaking. And today, since you're a mother
[Amit Varma]: with two growing kids, also, you would have seen them grow up as well. And today one,
[Amit Varma]: I think that that common layer isn't necessarily there, because across fields across cinema,
[Amit Varma]: music, the mainstream is dissipated, there are so many niches and so on. So that common
[Amit Varma]: layer isn't there. And also, I wonder whether serendipity then plays a greater role in how
[Amit Varma]: they are formed. Like, you know, looking back, I can see two things about myself. And one
[Amit Varma]: thing is that I have changed enormously to the extent that I was just a completely different
[Amit Varma]: person then. But there is something that was essential to the way that I was formed, which
[Amit Varma]: would could be the kind of music I like or the kind of reading I like, which is sort
[Amit Varma]: of stayed the same, and which was, in a sense, almost shaped by accident as it were. So what
[Amit Varma]: are sort of your thoughts on this as someone looking back at yourself and also looking
[Amit Varma]: at your kids today, where the whole world is sort of, in a sense, open to them. It's
[Amit Varma]: not just one video cassette circulating through society.
[Guest]: I mean, it's interesting you say that because in Kuwait, Kuwait also had two channels, right?
[Guest]: There was KTV1 and there was KTV2. So and there also you waited to watch English films.
[Guest]: There was used to be a show hosted by called Cine Club, which was hosted by an Egyptian
[Guest]: critic called Farooq Abdul Aziz. And so Thursday night and my parents would allow me to stay
[Guest]: up and watch that they were not interested themselves. But I was that was one thing I
[Guest]: was allowed to stay up and watch these, you know, world films that used to come on Thursday
[Guest]: night and used to be presented by Farooq Abdul Aziz. And so I used to wait, I used to listen
[Guest]: to his whole analysis in Arabic of the film and then, you know, sort of watch the film.
[Guest]: And one of those films that I saw, I feel in retrospect really shaped me. And I don't
[Guest]: remember what the film was, but it was a young woman who decides to become a nun, goes to
[Guest]: Nicaragua, goes to, I think, a Latin American country. And she's driven to actually serve
[Guest]: people and she's driven to resist violence. And she's very young. She becomes a nun, goes
[Guest]: there and and then gets murdered by those very by people while she's in the process
[Guest]: of helping them. And for some reason, that film and really the sincerity of the protagonist
[Guest]: stayed with me. And really, if I think back, it really made me channel, you know, a lot
[Guest]: of my energy and my later decisions, I feel, were guided some way through what the emotion
[Guest]: that I experienced while watching that film. And so similarly, you know, when you talk
[Guest]: about cultural journeys, it's a lot of things, you know, I mean, I feel like, yeah, we do
[Guest]: read similar stuff, etc, etc. But there are many factors that facilitate that, you know,
[Guest]: Kuwait did not have many bookshops. And you were always dependent on a parent to take
[Guest]: you to a library, etc. So, you know, it was my luck that my father would, he never said
[Guest]: no. If I said, okay, he would come back from office and I would say, I need to go to the
[Guest]: library, he would go back and it was a long drive back, etc. And take me patiently go
[Guest]: to the library, wait with me and bring things back. So, you know, there are those, those
[Guest]: kind of nurturing of interest, which and when you talk about my children, I realize how
[Guest]: important facilitating is having a facilitated journey. And I think it's also what you sort
[Guest]: of pick up in today's day and age, for example, you're saying there's so many various streams
[Guest]: you could sort of go down, right? It's not the same big, thick channel that you're everybody
[Guest]: swimming in. But I realize now more and more that actually, they're very, very individual
[Guest]: choices. So my son is very different from my daughter. There was a period where everybody
[Guest]: read Harry Potter, right? But now it's not like that anymore. And you're right in that.
[Guest]: But there still are, there still are those who will pick up Harry Potter. There are also
[Guest]: many forms that I feel we were not, you know, we read the Enid Blyton's and, you know, and
[Guest]: I'm very conventional reader, you know, I grew up reading Nancy Drew's and she was,
[Guest]: I would say my first big influence in terms of feminism was probably Nancy Drew. She was
[Guest]: this independent girl going about doing everything on her own with a very supportive father and,
[Guest]: you know, the whole doing detective work and driving around. It was like a dream to be
[Guest]: Nancy Drew, you know. But in, so there was one sort of form that we found. Now I find
[Guest]: that there are so many different, even games or gaming, I would say, you know, is actually
[Guest]: a way to explore, to have a cultural journey of your own. And I think those options perhaps
[Guest]: we didn't have. Now you're right. My kids do have them and many children have them.
[Guest]: But I would hesitate to say that it's very, very different. There are still, there's still
[Guest]: a values framework, you know, when you think in terms of a framework, there's still a certain
[Guest]: set of values that each of these are constructed on. So there will be some element of racism,
[Guest]: you know, there will be some sexism. They're embedded into all of these kinds of narratives,
[Guest]: even YA stories and so on. But there is, but kids are able to now see those things in a
[Guest]: better way, which is like the debates on Enid Blyton and the Gollywogs, for example. In
[Guest]: our time, we never thought twice about it in that sense, right? Now kids are talking
[Guest]: about it. They talk about representation in very serious ways. And I see that especially
[Guest]: in my daughter's case where she's 16. And so there is so much conversation on representation,
[Guest]: on expression, on gender identity, sexual identity. Not so much for my son yet, but
[Guest]: definitely for her. So there's a lens which is now different also, which we have to account
[Guest]: for, which wasn't there in our time. Again, I feel I've gone off topic.
[Amit Varma]: No, you can't possibly go off topic as long as you're talking about yourself. So, you
[Amit Varma]: know, I did an episode with Mrinal Pandey, where she told me about this period of time
[Amit Varma]: in her childhood when she realized that her mother is not only cooking meals for her husband
[Amit Varma]: every day, but is actually stressing out over them, trying really hard to make food that
[Amit Varma]: he likes. And she, I think Mrinal must have been 15 or 16 at the time, and she completely
[Amit Varma]: lost it. And she told her mother that how can you do this? Why are you wasting so much
[Amit Varma]: mental energy and emotion and all this over what a man is eating? And I was really struck
[Amit Varma]: by that, because at the time that this would have happened, perhaps in the 1960s, I was
[Amit Varma]: wondering that all of this is purely instinctive on her part. The frames came later. And as
[Amit Varma]: she pointed out also, as her reading expanded, the frames came later through which you begin
[Amit Varma]: to understand all of these and see these hidden structures, as you called it. And you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, in your daughter's case, of course, because we are open to the world and
[Amit Varma]: everything is so global, and we are influenced to thought from everywhere, that these frames
[Amit Varma]: are there, so she can see that. In your case, how did that awareness kind of come about?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, there is, I would imagine at one level, there is that instinctive thing that no, this
[Amit Varma]: is unfair. And then at another level over a period of time, one builds a frame where
[Amit Varma]: you then look at it and say that no, this is unfair, because and then you kind of go
[Amit Varma]: further. And obviously, when you're educated, you might be learning those in a formal way.
[Amit Varma]: But otherwise, what was that period of formation like? Like in my case, I remember and you
[Amit Varma]: know, the show is called the scene in the unseen. This is a classic case of the scene
[Amit Varma]: in the unseen that, you know, most men don't realize that there is an invisible layer that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, an invisible layer of awareness that women carry with them and everything
[Amit Varma]: they do. I can go for a walk at midnight, and there's no issue. But women have to think
[Amit Varma]: twice, you get into a lift, you look you look around at all the other people who are there.
[Amit Varma]: And it took me well into adulthood to even realize that there was this extra layer, right.
[Amit Varma]: But women obviously figure it out earlier. And I guess the options then would be that
[Amit Varma]: you normalize it, that this is the way things are, or you get pissed off, and you start
[Amit Varma]: thinking deeper about it. So what was that process for you of finding the feminist in
[Amit Varma]: yourself and shaping the feminist in yourself?
[Guest]: I would say, really, the experience of violence is the most obvious, even in a household where
[Guest]: one doesn't face discrimination. You know, I didn't realize that gender discrimination
[Guest]: was not really part of my, I didn't realize it until I was in college, in a sense, you
[Guest]: know. And I'm sure that's the case for many people of my generation, class, caste, etc.
[Guest]: Because you're going to school, you're not deprived of anything, you don't face that
[Guest]: kind of discrimination at home, in terms of food, etc. But I think the experience of violence,
[Guest]: so sexual violence, harassment, I realized very early on that, okay, this is something
[Guest]: that's wrong, you instinctively realize, you know, that this is wrong, that I have to fight
[Guest]: against it, that I have to, you know, either hit back or elbow jab or whatever it is. But
[Guest]: I cannot tell my parents, you know, because I don't want them to stop me from going out
[Guest]: on my cycle, etc. So I have to hide it, it has to be a secret. But I also can't let it
[Guest]: get me down, you know, that's also there. So I have to, whatever, resolve it in my head.
[Guest]: And I have to keep doing what I'm doing. So I think for me, that was the, that's the unseen
[Guest]: that I experienced, but I kept unseen from everyone around me. And it's a recurring thing
[Guest]: that, you know, would keep happening at different ages, at six, at eight, at whatever, 12, you
[Guest]: know, and then in buses in Delhi. So actually, sexual harassment is the primary experience
[Guest]: that makes you really realize that something is amiss and very rotten, something is rotten.
[Guest]: But the real sense of that something is even more off, structurally off, I think happened
[Guest]: when I was doing my, did my graduation in economics at the Sriram College of Commerce
[Guest]: in Delhi University. And there was a professor there, Professor Bose, Professor AJC Bose,
[Guest]: and he used to have this famous thing called the Bose notes, you know, which you used to
[Guest]: buy in the cyclo style shop. And he used to have these notes for developmental economics.
[Guest]: But in between, he used to have lyrics of Pink Floyd songs or Springsteen songs and
[Guest]: so on. And he was like a bit of a dude, you know, legend at that time. But he, he told
[Guest]: me when I asked him once, it was a BA in economics was very classical at the time, I don't know
[Guest]: if it still is. And I asked him, I said, you know, all this is all about men. What about
[Guest]: the work and labor that my mum does, my grandmum does? Nothing is showing up in all these in
[Guest]: the last three years that we've been studying economics, you know, it's just been abstract
[Guest]: and about the world, the male world, you know. And he told me that, you know, there is a
[Guest]: women's movement out there. Why don't you go and find it? You know, and they'll give
[Guest]: you the answer to this question. And that was the first time I then I went looking,
[Guest]: he asked me to go and visit Brinda Bose, who was a professor at Hindu College then. I went
[Guest]: to her, she told me, you know, Kali for Women, the publisher, they have a diary that they
[Guest]: bring out every year. And at the back of that there is a list of women's organizations.
[Guest]: So why don't you go in? And I went to the people tree, which used to be this shop next
[Guest]: to Regal in Delhi, and they used to have the Kali for Women diary. So I bought the diary
[Guest]: for that year. And then I looked at the back. And my best friend, Anvita and I, we went,
[Guest]: I said, let's go and visit these places. So one by one, we went to visit them. And I think
[Guest]: the third organization I went to, which was Jagori, which is a feminist group in Delhi.
[Guest]: I went there and said, you know, I want to work here. And Abha who was running that place
[Guest]: at the time, she said, okay, come from tomorrow. So I said, okay, fine. It was a really hot
[Guest]: day in April in Delhi. And she said, yeah, come, come from tomorrow. So then I started
[Guest]: working in Jagori. This was my third year in college. And I'm still with Jagori in a
[Guest]: sense I'm on their board now. But so that started me on a line of questioning that I
[Guest]: hadn't asked before. And I realized that okay, so, you know, this whole question of women's
[Guest]: why is it? Why is housework women's work? I hadn't thought about it. I thought it was
[Guest]: some accident of fate that you know, my mom was just doing that. It is so naive, you know,
[Guest]: really. And it shows showed me like how privileged we are and the blinkers we wear really, you
[Guest]: know, in in the world we live in. So anyway, that was sort of my how I found the women's
[Guest]: movement and today in today's day. I mean, that's an even now I'm, you know, I had not
[Guest]: yet found feminism even when I joined Jagori. I think as part of Jagori, then I went to
[Guest]: a workshop where I was given the task of doing the English report. And it was a workshop
[Guest]: with rural women in UP of the Mahila Samakhya program. Mahila Samakhya was a adult literacy
[Guest]: women's literacy program that the government had started. And it was being sort of it was
[Guest]: taken up with a lot of enthusiasm by lots of feminist groups who were working with the
[Guest]: state for the first time in a sense, you know, otherwise they had mostly worked sort of against
[Guest]: the state or demanding that they make laws and so on and so forth. So they were providing
[Guest]: the perspective building to this generation of, you know, adult women who were learning
[Guest]: to read and write and creating collectives and so on. It was a women's empowerment program.
[Guest]: So in that, I think that was the training in which I'd gone just to write the report
[Guest]: that I realized it was a gender training. And that was where I was introduced formally
[Guest]: to the idea of feminism. And feminism and it was like a third eye open for me, you know,
[Guest]: it all everything fell into place, how gender roles and in the idea of what was expected
[Guest]: from women and men, how different it was, and how it was actually not the same across
[Guest]: the world, which meant it was fluid. I mean, it was it was socially constructed. And that
[Guest]: got me really thinking about these kinds of things and explained to me a lot of my own
[Guest]: experiences of violence and explained to me why the context of say my mum or my grandmum
[Guest]: and my aunts and so on and the world around me, I could just could understand everything
[Guest]: clearly, you know, after that. And I think there was one moment in that in particular
[Guest]: that I'd like to say that was a we took all the participants went to watch a show of Mrityudand,
[Guest]: which was a film by Prakash Jha. And in that, there's a scene in which Shabana Azmi plays
[Guest]: the role of the of one of the sort of protagonists and she she gets pregnant. And the younger
[Guest]: sister-in-law asks her, whose baby is it? And she says, it's my baby. And it was such
[Guest]: a powerful statement. And the next day, people couldn't stop talking about that particular
[Guest]: moment where we, you know, just the understanding that this child could be mine. It doesn't
[Guest]: it's not you don't have to name the father. It's not the father's really our bodies
[Guest]: are our own, our wombs are our own. So that it was such a radical idea. So I think moments
[Guest]: like that, you know, built one on top of the other stacked up to really create, for me,
[Guest]: an understanding of feminism that became a lens through which then I actually then proceeded
[Guest]: with my activism as well as my academic work and so on. And, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And again, sort of the accidents of life that, you know, Professor Bose happened
[Amit Varma]: to be your economics teacher. And had you asked some other economics teacher, you might
[Amit Varma]: not have been told go and, you know, maybe some other chain of events gets you there,
[Amit Varma]: but not this. So, you know, like before this, what is it that you wanted to do? Like, what
[Amit Varma]: was your image of yourself that these are the things I will do in the world? Like, like
[Amit Varma]: many of us in our generation, whatever we studied was kind of by accident, you just
[Amit Varma]: drift into something and inertia and you kind of go along and it has no relevance with what
[Amit Varma]: you end up doing. So were you also drifting or were there specific things you wanted to
[Amit Varma]: do? And then when this sort of light bulb moment happens, and this third eye opens,
[Amit Varma]: as it were, do you, you know, how did that change things? And how did that shape the
[Amit Varma]: direction that you sort of went in after that?
[Guest]: I'll have to go a little bit further back to answer that, because I, my daughter asked
[Guest]: me recently, what did you want to be when you were young? And then it got me thinking
[Guest]: and I realized that, you know, until the Gulf War, I did have dreams. I did think that,
[Guest]: you know, I wanted to be a surgeon, which is, I mean, you know, these are not really,
[Guest]: I suppose, our own dreams. But you hear, you think that you'll do something, you'll save
[Guest]: people or whatever. But so I wanted to be a surgeon. And I realized that actually, since
[Guest]: the invasion, and the way life changed overnight, I stopped having dreams for myself. I stopped
[Guest]: thinking that, okay, when I grow up, I want to be this, I want to be that. And I actually
[Guest]: hadn't realized it until she asked me that. Yes, I mean, until then, I had wanted to be
[Guest]: a doctor. But then, since then, I never thought I want to be this, I want to be that. I drifted.
[Guest]: I went by what I thought interested me at the moment. And I think I had the maybe luxury
[Guest]: of doing that, because maybe there you have gender, you know, a gender role sort of here
[Guest]: where nobody's telling you to be an engineer or doctor, maybe that that's not the case
[Guest]: for many boys of that time, or, you know, socioeconomic class. So I didn't, I didn't
[Guest]: know much about sociology. But after then, I once I'd finished my graduation, I realized
[Guest]: that actually the questions I was asking, fitted much more into the stream of sociology.
[Guest]: And so then I thought, okay, I let me try to do sociology. And then I just loved, I
[Guest]: loved the subject. And I loved sociology, I never thought that I would be and one doesn't
[Guest]: dream I grew up and be a sociologist, something like that. Not a very glamorous occupation.
[Guest]: But I also feel you don't have to be one thing in a lifetime, you know, I really find that
[Guest]: I mean, and now I am a writer. So one can say that, yes. I always knew that writing
[Guest]: was something I would always do. But, but yeah, I mean, you know, it's that dream that
[Guest]: you know, the Marx has this thing, right? You want to go fishing in the morning, you
[Guest]: want to do your writing in the afternoon or whatever, there are three things that he says
[Guest]: that, you know, you can do many things in a day. And in your life, I feel as you as
[Guest]: you age, and as you discover yourself more and more and more, you realize what you want
[Guest]: to do. So I feel like you should have one career in a decade, like every decade, you
[Guest]: should change your career. I work in the development sector. So that is, that's an important thing
[Guest]: that I carry with me. But alongside I do several things. So I have multiple, actually interests
[Guest]: and therefore, careers in a sense.
[Amit Varma]: What was it about leaving Kuwait that made you stop having dreams? Or is it maybe you
[Amit Varma]: can't put your finger on why or looking back? Do you think you know, because the way you
[Amit Varma]: kind of, it almost seems like a defining moment that something happened and you just stopped
[Amit Varma]: thinking?
[Guest]: And this is in retrospect completely. And one didn't, one went along with the flow at
[Guest]: that time. It was because, you know, I never saw my, the house that we left when, I mean,
[Guest]: we left just the night of the invasion. And that was by accident, because we didn't, we
[Guest]: were coming on holiday. And so we were never able to go back to that house when my father
[Guest]: was able to go back. You know, you one heard that there was, you know, so it's very visual
[Guest]: actually what he found when he went back. We used to have a green carpet. It used to
[Guest]: be wall to wall carpeting all the houses. And after the invasion, when the oil wells
[Guest]: were all burning, right, you would have seen those images of that time, fantastic images
[Guest]: of just black skies and just blazing fires from the oil wells. And what happened was
[Guest]: that crude condensed, these were air conditioned homes. So when the crude went inside the flats,
[Guest]: they would condense and they would sink into the carpets. So actually, when you step into
[Guest]: the carpet, you squelch. So you're going into like little lakes of crude oil, essentially,
[Guest]: you know, and you have black stained walls. And so this is the kind of image I heard from
[Guest]: my father when he did go back after the war was over. But essentially, I never went back
[Guest]: to that house. I never went back to that school. I never went back to that life. And many years
[Guest]: later, only when Facebook came around, did one reconnect with, you know, my classmates
[Guest]: from around the world over there. So it was like, I think it demonstrated that things
[Guest]: can change completely. You cannot, you can make all the plans you want in the world.
[Guest]: But I mean, who knows what will happen. So subconsciously, I think that's the message.
[Guest]: That's the big headline, you know, like in neon mounted that, you know, that was like
[Guest]: blinking in my head. And so, you know, that's the reason I think why one stopped having
[Guest]: very fixed plans.
[Amit Varma]: I'm also interested by something you said a while back about showing that film, where
[Amit Varma]: the Shabana Azmi character says ki yeh mera beta hai, yeh mera bacha hai and how the women
[Amit Varma]: reacted to that. And it just strikes me as a lightbulb moment. Like what I sometimes,
[Amit Varma]: like the phrase I use while talking about ideas is that sometimes in life, people have
[Amit Varma]: a lightbulb moment and it goes off and you can't turn it back off. It's always on. Right.
[Amit Varma]: And this is such a good example of that. What was it like that? Because, you know, I would
[Amit Varma]: assume that at that event, then what you've done is you facilitated a lightbulb moment
[Amit Varma]: for so many people. And I presume over your over the time you worked in that field, you
[Amit Varma]: know, there have been those lightbulb moments and so on and so forth. So what are those
[Amit Varma]: like? Because each of those must be so mind blowing to witness someone's third eye going
[Amit Varma]: on, as it were, to go back to the description that you used. So what was that like? And
[Amit Varma]: was there something to hope for in that, in the sense that in general, I am a pessimistic
[Amit Varma]: person when I look around me, because we can see what is happening around us. You know,
[Amit Varma]: we can, we haven't made all that much progress, if at all, in so many areas like gender, caste,
[Amit Varma]: and the religious othering, of course, is now particularly out of whack. But in all
[Amit Varma]: of these areas, we haven't made that much progress. So there is at one level, this sort
[Amit Varma]: of deep sinking feeling that, hey, this is who we are, and we're never going to get out
[Amit Varma]: of this mess. But at the same time, what you're describing is that it is possible to light
[Amit Varma]: off these lightbulb moments to make things happen to make people see the world differently,
[Amit Varma]: especially to make women see the world differently. You know, I had a guest on the show a while
[Amit Varma]: back, Shruti Kapila, who was talking about how tragic it is that women in India don't
[Amit Varma]: form a vote bank, because if they did, then you know, they could set so many things right.
[Amit Varma]: And almost as a counter to that, a few weeks ago, I had the journalist Rukmini S on the
[Amit Varma]: show. And she pointed out that there is no such thing as a women vote bank, because like
[Amit Varma]: all of us women contain multitudes, right? So you've got your own priorities, just as
[Amit Varma]: your family does. And it's not that all women everywhere will work as one. I know this is
[Amit Varma]: a bit rambly, but I'm intrigued by that, that the fact is that there can be lightbulb moments
[Amit Varma]: that they are lightbulbs, as it were. So, you know, these same women whom you see react
[Amit Varma]: like this, do they then go back to their lives, and they just live lives of quiet desperation
[Amit Varma]: as Thoreau would put it or is social change actually happening on the margins at a glacial
[Amit Varma]: incremental pace, but it's real.
[Guest]: I have now been part of the women's movement for 25 years. So I can tell you that change
[Guest]: is happening. You know, I feel in the everyday, it's very hard to see. So this is the thing
[Guest]: about change, right? It is incremental. It's not linear, it goes back and forth. And it's
[Guest]: in, I mean, some things that we think are, what we might not define as success, may actually
[Guest]: be defined by others as success. And I can give you some examples of that. But before
[Guest]: that, I'll say that, you know, everything is a bargain, right? There's this scholar
[Guest]: called Denise Gandiotti, and she has a term called bargaining with patriarchy. And how
[Guest]: actually across the world in different cultures, we have different kinds of patriarchy where
[Guest]: some things are valued more than others. So in the case of India, Middle East, etc, there
[Guest]: is very classic patriarchy where shame and honor, for example, is the most important
[Guest]: framework, right? So it's inexplicable why a family would murder their daughter, right?
[Guest]: It doesn't make sense. But in their context of classic patriarchy, where shame and honor
[Guest]: are the most valued social currency, you have to understand it in that context, really understand.
[Guest]: Now everything that women's wins have always been through small, small bargains with patriarchy.
[Guest]: So okay, I will, you know, it's like I will go to school, but I will wear a certain kind
[Guest]: of clothing or I will, you know, do all the housework, then I will go out for paid work.
[Guest]: You know, everything is actually small bargains with patriarchy through which you make, come,
[Guest]: move ahead. For us, we do see change happening over generations, right? We know that our
[Guest]: mother's lives, my grandmother's life, my mother's life, my life, my daughter's life,
[Guest]: very, very different. And they are, that's the visible change. So over generations, you
[Guest]: see change happening. In my work, not for us, we see it in generations, but in some
[Guest]: places. So for example, in places in rural India, even a small change will be very conspicuous
[Guest]: and very big. So a young girl talking to a young boy, you know, it will be seen as something
[Guest]: very huge. It might lead to a dangerous situation and so on. So it depends from context to context.
[Guest]: So I am so hopeful because I never, when I joined the feminist movement, people didn't
[Guest]: know what feminism was. It's unthinkable that today a 21 year old as I was then doesn't
[Guest]: know what feminism is, right? Now, everybody knows what feminism, feminism is so mainstreamed,
[Guest]: even though it's sometimes I feel it's oversimplified. And it's fashionable, etc. So in a sense,
[Guest]: I mean, even I've dropped, I've stopped calling myself feminist researcher and writer because
[Amit Varma]: it doesn't make sense anymore.
[Guest]: Everybody's posturing and all of that.
[Guest]: And I'm, and actually, when I say feminist researcher and writer, it's because I'm a
[Guest]: scholar of feminism. So it's not exactly the same thing. But the point is that now nobody
[Guest]: has to buy the Kali diary and go hunting for a women's organization and work in institutional
[Guest]: feminism to experience, to be a feminist, to practice activism because of the internet,
[Guest]: they can do it, you know, they don't have to be in a women's group to be an activist.
[Guest]: So it's a completely different scenario, the quality of conversation Amit has changed. So
[Guest]: I used to work on violence against women when I joined Jagori. Even today, the issues that
[Guest]: say a Jagori or any other women's organization works on might be the same. But the quality
[Guest]: of conversation has changed. For example, the conversation on victim blaming, on claiming
[Guest]: public spaces on the right to be out and about on the right to mobility to wear what women
[Guest]: want to wear. These kinds of conversations have now become mainstream, which wasn't the
[Amit Varma]: case 20 years back.
[Amit Varma]: Just thinking aloud, like I often, you know, transplant this saying about futurists and
[Amit Varma]: science fiction writers to the creative economy. And I talk about how creators often overestimate
[Amit Varma]: the short term and underestimate the long term. And it seems to me that maybe that is
[Amit Varma]: what social workers should be wary of as well, of overestimating the short term, and imagining
[Amit Varma]: that they'll see dramatic changes, and of underestimating the long term and giving up
[Amit Varma]: hope because they don't see anything happening immediately. And what you seem to be describing
[Amit Varma]: is that yeah, you know, if you're zoomed into the present moment, it may seem that nothing
[Amit Varma]: is changing or is too slow and you might be frustrated and why should I bargain with patriarchy
[Amit Varma]: and blah, blah, blah. But if you zoom out, then you see that yeah, you know, our lives
[Amit Varma]: are different from our mothers and their mothers and so on and so forth. And that's really
[Amit Varma]: interesting. And I, you know, just speaking of sort of shifting ways of thinking in your
[Amit Varma]: book Manik, when you speak about the influence of the Mathura case from 1979 on the women's
[Amit Varma]: movement, which again, seems like a light bulb moment for my listeners, what really
[Amit Varma]: happened there was this, this girl was raped by these two cops, and they got acquitted
[Amit Varma]: because the argument of the acquittal was that she was habituated to sex and therefore
[Amit Varma]: it was kind of okay. And you speak about how that created a Philip, in a sense for the
[Amit Varma]: feminist movement and, you know, set a chain of events and people could kind of organize
[Amit Varma]: about that. And there's a passage from your book Intimacy, which also I'll read out where
[Amit Varma]: towards the end when you speak about interviews with sex workers, you write, quote, we see
[Amit Varma]: from the interviews that once someone consents to enter the occupation of escorting, further
[Amit Varma]: consent is not deemed necessary. There is a sense that wives and sex workers don't have
[Amit Varma]: a right to consent, because they have already offered lifelong consent simply through participating
[Amit Varma]: in their respective institutions. Mugdha's experience of rape is akin to marital rape.
[Amit Varma]: In this sense, escorting is a lot like housewifery in its vulnerabilities and the emotional labor
[Amit Varma]: involved. And this really struck me because you speak about how, you know, even sex workers
[Amit Varma]: complain about the binaries of the whore and Madonna that that kind of and the false binaries,
[Amit Varma]: of course, that exist. But here you actually see an example of where whether you're from
[Amit Varma]: this extreme or that extreme and quote, unquote, around extremes, of course, consent is simply
[Amit Varma]: not given importance. I mean, you look at the current debates around marital rape, you
[Amit Varma]: kind of feel that at some conceptual levels, there is still a glacial pace of at least
[Amit Varma]: the way that the law operates in society at large operates, even if the discourse has
[Amit Varma]: changed that many more people can talk about consent and sort of voice all of this. And
[Amit Varma]: this was in fact, one of the most striking passages from your book for me, because it's
[Amit Varma]: quite a revelation to realize that whether you're a sex worker or a housewife, the Madonna
[Amit Varma]: or the whore, you still are not supposed to have consent in this in this country, which
[Amit Varma]: is just crazy, which, you know, and I completely understand that your big picture view is that
[Amit Varma]: you take a zoom back and things have gotten better and it's incremental and it's glacial.
[Amit Varma]: But all this stuff is still there.
[Guest]: Yeah, I think consent is a little complicated. And I know it's one of the principles. I was
[Guest]: telling you, I watched your show with Kavita yesterday and with Kavita Krishnan, which
[Guest]: is a documentary, the video thing. And I, you know, I know consent is one of the principles
[Guest]: that I've understood you sort of really honor. I feel in and you're right. I mean, the point
[Guest]: I was trying to make in the passage that you read out is that actually for sex workers
[Guest]: and for in this case for escorts and for wives, while most clients find consent to be a very
[Guest]: important value, they have explicitly stated in all the interviews I did that they would
[Guest]: not want to actually be with someone who has been coerced. And so consent and consent on
[Guest]: the Internet is actually verbalized, you know, which is not so clearly done in the everyday.
[Guest]: But their understanding was that once a woman has consented to being an escort, then further
[Guest]: consent is not required. So, you know, within that, then anything can, you know, she's open
[Guest]: to anything. That's their assumption that no further thing is required. If she's consented
[Guest]: to be in the vocation, that's enough. And so I make a parallel that it's the same for
[Guest]: many housewives in a sense, because once you have agreed to be a wife, then your marital
[Guest]: duties, which is how the, you know, which is a commonly used term in law, actually,
[Guest]: you are expected to fulfill your marital duties. There's no further consent required in that.
[Guest]: And that is one of the blocks or obstacles to conceiving of marital rape in the eyes
[Guest]: of the law. So this is that's the context in which that quote is sort of talked about.
[Guest]: But I want to complicate this idea of consent and agency a little bit, because I don't know
[Guest]: if you'll remember, there was this video that went viral, you know, people trying to explain
[Guest]: consent and there's this cup of tea, like if someone, you know, there's basically tea
[Guest]: and if you say no to tea, to having that cup of tea, then nobody can force you to have
[Guest]: that cup of tea. So this was a video that went viral trying to explain this idea of
[Guest]: consent. So if you haven't consented to drinking that tea, you can't, you shouldn't be, you
[Guest]: shouldn't have to have that tea. And I, when I watched it, I was like, you know, this is
[Guest]: not true in India, because consent is much more complicated than that, right? You have
[Guest]: tea for various reasons. I cannot imagine going to do my fieldwork in rural India and
[Guest]: not having tea in some even though I'm not much of a tea drinker, and I'm very specific
[Guest]: about my tea. But it means that I am not practicing casteism. It means that I am comfortable in
[Guest]: a rural location. It communicates so many things. I mean, can you imagine going to some
[Guest]: my aunt's house or someone and refusing to have tea or a mithai or, you know, lunch or
[Guest]: dinner or whatever, you know, you, you can't do it. So even if I don't want to do it, one
[Guest]: has to do it for the various meanings that are there in that surrounding it. And so I
[Guest]: feel sometimes we get stuck in this idea of consent as being very black and white, but
[Guest]: it isn't. And yeah.
[Amit Varma]: You know, it also reminded me of, and this is something Rukmini pointed me to in the
[Amit Varma]: episode I did with her, where we were discussing, actually, where we were discussing sex workers
[Amit Varma]: and why sex workers throughout Southeast Asia are wary of Indians, because Indians apparently
[Amit Varma]: are especially brutal and so on. And she pointed me to this book by Srinath Perur called If
[Amit Varma]: It's Monday, It Must Be Madurai, which is a travelogue. And he goes to Thailand with
[Amit Varma]: a bunch of tourists. He's basically going on these tourist trips to different places
[Amit Varma]: and seeing what happens. So is it Thailand or is it one of the ex Soviet Republic countries,
[Amit Varma]: but wherever he goes to this place, people go for sex tourism and he describes the people
[Amit Varma]: who are with him and how they are treating sex workers. And there's one particular scene
[Amit Varma]: where, you know, to the effect of that, once a sex worker has consented to come with you,
[Amit Varma]: you can do whatever, you know. And this notion of women sort of as a property of men requiring
[Amit Varma]: the permission of men, which is much worse than even this, because at least before agreeing
[Amit Varma]: to this, the sex worker is her own person, but is enshrined in our laws. I mean, even
[Amit Varma]: if the adultery law went, for example, you know, 497, which was the adultery law, spoke
[Amit Varma]: about how if a person has sex with the wife of another man, quote, without the consent
[Amit Varma]: or connivence of that man, as if she is a man's property, then he is guilty. And one
[Amit Varma]: law that is still there is 498, which is enticing or taking away or detaining with criminal
[Amit Varma]: intent a married woman, where again, you know, if somebody entices away a woman who he knows
[Amit Varma]: to be the wife of another man, now quote, from that man or from any other person having
[Amit Varma]: the care of her on behalf of that man, and blah, blah, blah. So it's not treating the
[Amit Varma]: woman as someone with agency, it's treating her as sort of the property of a man. And
[Amit Varma]: this is enshrined in our laws. And luckily, I think what is happening is I agree with
[Amit Varma]: you on the broader point that social change is happening, even if it's slow, because I
[Amit Varma]: remember that if, for example, 377 was struck down in 1988, it wouldn't have gone quietly,
[Amit Varma]: and it wouldn't have been greeted with such public celebration as it was when the law
[Amit Varma]: against homosexuality went. And some of these laws are still there, and hopefully they will
[Amit Varma]: go in time. But given your circles, there is, to some extent, I guess a little bit of
[Amit Varma]: selection bias, because you would be moving around with other feminists and activists
[Amit Varma]: and people who are involved in the field. But when you sort of look around, are there
[Amit Varma]: moments where you pause, are there moments through these years, in fact, where you've
[Amit Varma]: said, is there any point to this? And I am perhaps sounding a bit bleaker than I should
[Amit Varma]: be. But I'm looking around at what is happening on other margins in our society. And wondering
[Amit Varma]: if in certain other areas, we're actually slipping backwards. You know, for example,
[Amit Varma]: women's participation in the workforce has gone down drastically over the last 15 years.
[Amit Varma]: I've had a bunch of episodes on this, most recently with Shrena Bhattacharya. So I mean,
[Amit Varma]: I'm not even pushing back against what you're saying, because I agree with it. I think if
[Amit Varma]: you zoom in, you can see that, you know, we do tend to overestimate the short term and
[Amit Varma]: a lot of progress is possible. But you know, are there moments where you've doubted this?
[Amit Varma]: What's that journey sort of been like?
[Guest]: Every day, every day, one wonders, you know, what, what this world is coming to, what this
[Guest]: country is coming to? Should one move to Canada? All these questions.
[Amit Varma]: Why Canada?
[Guest]: I mean, anywhere, but you know, why not Canada? Yes, I think so. So it's not, when I said
[Guest]: that yes, change is happening, it's certainly in a certain field. There's also regressive
[Guest]: changes happening, say in another field. So like in the case of definitely in the situation
[Guest]: of Muslim, you know, communities in the country, it's unimaginable what they must be going
[Guest]: through right, right now. So it is, things have become in terms of free speech and expression,
[Guest]: what we're facing. It's really and really impoverishment and economic precarity, which
[Guest]: is the context of, of countries around the world, I feel, but especially India, there
[Guest]: is a certain return to poverty, which we can see, which may not be reported in our, you
[Guest]: know, but we see it around us every day. Young boys just digging sides of roads as that's
[Guest]: their future or I have seen a return to street sex work like last eight years in the area
[Guest]: where I live. One didn't really see soliciting happening, but now one sees it's back and
[Guest]: it's there in many other parts of the world as well now. So definitely the situation and
[Guest]: women's workforce participation, I mean, we can talk about that separately, because I
[Guest]: think Mannequin was very connected to that. I think there are very much such, such moments,
[Guest]: but there's also resistance to it, right? There's also, I mean, we've had the CAA protest,
[Guest]: we've had the farmers protest, we've had student protests, we have the emergence of a range
[Guest]: of feminism. So like you said, there are multitudes even of feminisms, right? There's, you know,
[Guest]: Dalit feminism, Muslim feminism, there is, these are emerging as very strong conceptual
[Guest]: frameworks with their own histories, their own origin stories and their own, I hesitate
[Guest]: to say cadre, but you know what I mean, like a strong network of people who are actually
[Guest]: taking that agenda forward. So the struggles are continuing and then there's hope in that,
[Guest]: you know, that's the, that's the hope that we'll keep fighting, we'll keep resisting
[Guest]: and you know, there'll be more and more people joining that, that sort of stream of resistance.
[Guest]: And it's unfortunate that we could be spending our time really discovering new things, thinking
[Guest]: new things, like just doing amazing things. And instead, we are having to protect these
[Guest]: gains that we have made that we are now going back on. Yeah, I think that, so that's one
[Guest]: part of the answer. The other part is actually being wary of moves that appear progressive,
[Guest]: but are actually regressive. So for example, laws like, and you spoke of laws, laws like
[Guest]: the one against triple talaq that was created, that seemed to be, that was promoted as being
[Guest]: or projected as being something for Muslim women. But actually what it does is demonize
[Guest]: Muslim men or say raising the age at marriage, which nobody's stopping anyone from marrying
[Guest]: at 21. But this actually increases that 18 to 21, the vulnerable age where young people's
[Guest]: sexuality is criminalized. And you know that our laws criminalize and you know, parents
[Guest]: are constantly using different kinds of laws to prevent daughters from marrying of their
[Guest]: own choice or having intercaste relations and so on. So that increases that the captivity
[Guest]: of actually girls in between 18 and 21. So, you know, these kinds of legislation that
[Guest]: profess to be progressive, and actually nobody will say no, right? Nobody will say that no,
[Guest]: I don't think that 21 is the right age to marry. I don't even think 21 is the right
[Guest]: age to marry. But who gets affected by a law like that? Actually, it is poor people who
[Guest]: are marginalized groups for whom getting their girls married at 18 is a way of survival.
[Guest]: It has its own logic. And it is a way for many young girls to actually escape violent
[Guest]: homes and to try and, you know, have an adult life. Because for us, we don't have an either
[Guest]: you're married or you're a child and then you're married. I mean, there's no in between
[Guest]: sort of phase which is allowed to majority of women, you know, to live an independent
[Guest]: life. There's no imagination. Like you said, you know, the adultery law and so on. So many
[Guest]: laws are framed around a wifehood, right? So everything is the family is like the family
[Guest]: unit. It's like the fulcrum around which many of our laws operate. So where do we see single
[Guest]: women? It's really hard. There's no imagination of women outside either marriage or prostitution.
[Guest]: These are the two institutions within which people can imagine. Even the state can imagine
[Guest]: women. And that is changing now because there are more single women, but they are marginalized
[Guest]: also. They don't have access to so many kinds of, you know, citizenship rights. Really,
[Guest]: it's hard to find a house. It's hard. It's so difficult to do so many things as a single
[Guest]: woman in this country. So there are, yeah, multiple issues working here that make progress
[Guest]: very difficult. So I agree with you there. But my hope is really that there are also
[Guest]: people who are resisting constantly.
[Amit Varma]: So I have a complicated question. But before that, a quick observation that as far as the
[Amit Varma]: economy is concerned, I think one reason that people refuse to acknowledge or leave unseen
[Amit Varma]: what is happening to the economy is that so much of the damage has happened in the unorganized
[Amit Varma]: sector, especially demonetization onwards. There is absolutely no reckoning of that.
[Amit Varma]: Earlier we used to kind of try and figure out what's happening in the informal sector,
[Amit Varma]: you know, with proxies and so on and so forth. But I think the damage after demon and the
[Amit Varma]: botched implementation of GST already was sending us on a downward trajectory, which
[Amit Varma]: of course COVID contributed to. And I'm really glad you brought up that question of laws
[Amit Varma]: and I'll cite a couple of other sort of similar laws with unintended consequences, including
[Amit Varma]: one from your book. And then we can, and then I'll segue to this sort of larger question
[Amit Varma]: I want to ask. And, you know, as far as similar laws are concerned, I remember when I was
[Amit Varma]: editing Pragati, the policy magazine, three or four years ago, I'd carried a piece where
[Amit Varma]: an economist, I think she'd written about how it actually hurt women in terms of getting
[Amit Varma]: jobs after the maternity law was passed, the maternity leave law was passed because the
[Amit Varma]: incentives for employers now changed drastically. So you had the classic example of a law with
[Amit Varma]: good intentions and, you know, bad outcomes. And, you know, similarly, I had once, you
[Amit Varma]: know, written a piece on child labor where everyone can agree, and I think I'd written
[Amit Varma]: this in 2007, but it was still hold true. It's a universal thing that everybody would
[Amit Varma]: agree that child labor is terrible, and you need to eliminate it. But how do you do it?
[Amit Varma]: You can't just pass a law and hope it goes away. And I cited this Oxfam study, where
[Amit Varma]: they spoke about how international outrage forced factories to lay off 30,000 child workers,
[Amit Varma]: and they followed these 30,000 child workers, many of them starved to death, many became
[Amit Varma]: prostitutes. Similarly, a 1995 UNICEF study described how a boycott of carpets made in
[Amit Varma]: Nepal using child labor, right? And you'd imagine that such a boycott is a good thing.
[Amit Varma]: You're fighting child labor, but it led to between 5000 to 7000 Nepali girls turning
[Amit Varma]: to prostitution, because a better option was now denied to them. And similarly, in your
[Amit Varma]: book, you talk about the ban on dance bars, where you write to quote you, the ban allegedly
[Amit Varma]: left over 75,000 women without a job overnight, and 2500 establishments in the lurch. And
[Amit Varma]: later you add, you know, by the time it was going through the courts, you add, quote,
[Amit Varma]: bar dancers entered penury and were displaced, many moving to smaller towns, some pushed
[Amit Varma]: underground into sex work, reports occasionally came out of former bar girls taking their
[Amit Varma]: own life, stop code. And in all of these cases, you have people identifying what is what appears
[Amit Varma]: to be a great social problem, you have them with the best of intentions, framing laws
[Amit Varma]: to fight it. And then you have these unintended consequences, which hurt those who are supposed
[Amit Varma]: to help the most. And my larger question here is this, that I think that when it comes to
[Amit Varma]: social movements and to activism, there is a danger that some of that activism becomes
[Amit Varma]: activism for the sake of activism, in the sense that when I look around me, you are
[Amit Varma]: right that it's a wonderful thing that many more people including men are more aware of
[Amit Varma]: what feminism is and can identify it. But equally, you have a lot of posturing, including
[Amit Varma]: a lot of shrill posturing happening. On the one hand, which which would be social media,
[Amit Varma]: which is not necessarily going in productive directions. And on the other hand, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you have activism, which is kind of going in these directions, where you have funding,
[Amit Varma]: you need to show you're doing something with it, or you've passed a law, you need to show
[Amit Varma]: a win, so to say, and you do that. And you may not always be aware of ground realities.
[Amit Varma]: Like, you know, Kavita Krishnan had done a four hour episode with me where she spoke
[Amit Varma]: eloquently on aspects of this, how, you know, so many feminists, you know, don't have that
[Amit Varma]: lived experience of working on the ground with victims and people who've actually gone
[Amit Varma]: through all of these, but they forge ahead anyway in search of these sort of wins and
[Amit Varma]: so on and so forth. So now when you look at the movement, and you've been part of the
[Amit Varma]: movement for such a long time and been part of the grassroots and covered so many different
[Amit Varma]: aspects of it, what is your sense of this, especially in the last, say, 10 years, where
[Amit Varma]: social media now allows anyone to become an active to become a quote unquote, activist
[Amit Varma]: with very little effort, you can suddenly go on, and, you know, signal the greatest
[Amit Varma]: virtue by just typing a few words out on Twitter, you don't actually have to go out in the world
[Amit Varma]: and do anything and make people's life better. So is this something that you've seen? Is
[Amit Varma]: it hard to reconcile? Do you look around, for example, at your fellow travelers, and
[Amit Varma]: obviously, many of those fellow travelers would be like you who just want to make a
[Amit Varma]: change who know that they're playing the long game, it's a long haul, so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: But it may not be that way for everyone.
[Guest]: Alongside that, I'd add the problem of the NGO-ization of social movements. So there
[Guest]: is also that there, there's also the funding, you know, politics at play here, which is
[Guest]: that, you know, there is funding, it's become a sector like anything else, social change
[Guest]: is a sector now, as much as activism or a desire for change in that sense. Yeah, I feel
[Guest]: that despite, I agree that there is a lot of posturing, not, I don't think that's there
[Guest]: in institutional feminism, I think institutional feminism is beset by other problems related
[Guest]: to the NGO-ization of the sector. But in terms of woke feminism, you know, that kind of a
[Guest]: very superficial engagement with issues. I do agree. But I feel that this is a journey
[Guest]: that each individual goes through, honestly, and I've never, I've always felt people find
[Guest]: their own feminism, and they find it at a moment in time that is relevant to them. And
[Guest]: it has to have, it has to make sense for them, right? There, it has to ultimately change
[Guest]: something in their life for it to have meaning. That's why I take the term feminist quite
[Guest]: lightly now. One doesn't, one knows that it's not actually very deep understanding of a
[Guest]: certain kind of scholarship around feminism that we're really looking at, or thinking
[Guest]: around feminism. So I do see, I understand what you're saying, but I feel some of these
[Guest]: debates that emerge. So even if it is, for example, the question of the crowdfunded,
[Guest]: the LOSHA, the list of sexual harassment in academia, the LOSHA, the first Me Too basically
[Guest]: in India. Correct, correct. I'm forgetting her name now, but the young woman who had
[Guest]: Raya Sarkar, it was the name of the young woman who had sort of brought, started that
[Guest]: crowdfunded list. And so, you know, there will be many people who will sort of go along
[Guest]: with it, but it pointed to a real fault line in the movement, which is the question of
[Guest]: caste identity and really what the whole thing that, you know, Raya Sarkar herself being
[Guest]: a young Dalit feminist was really the list, in the list, most of them were upper caste
[Guest]: male academics who were accused. And, you know, there was a letter written by older
[Guest]: feminists challenging the mode of, you know, the way that it was just a public list without
[Guest]: due process. And younger feminists then wrote sort of, wrote a rebuttal against that saying
[Guest]: that look what due process has got us, it's brought us absolutely nothing. And so that
[Guest]: led to what was a vicious sort of a moment. And, but it pointed for me at many fault lines
[Guest]: that we'd been ignoring, which is really the question of an intergenerational dialogue,
[Guest]: because I don't find that actually they were saying very different things. It's just this
[Guest]: one group had a faith in due process, one group did not have a faith in due process,
[Guest]: but it was caste in caste identity mold. And so it assumed a different shape and form.
[Guest]: And the problem I feel is that we move too quickly from one eruption to the next. And
[Guest]: there's not enough time or space or dialogue, actually, a constructive, empathetic and compassionate
[Guest]: dialogue between groups to arrive at a more complete, you won't resolve it, right? You
[Guest]: won't resolve something that is so deep and fundamental, like caste identity and the experience
[Guest]: of being oppressed or being the oppressor or blind privilege and so on. You will not
[Guest]: resolve it, but you will shift something through dialogue if you give it some space. What I
[Guest]: find disturbing is that we quickly, this finishes and then we have, you know, question of, you
[Guest]: know, cis women versus trans women. I mean, there'll be a new debate that will emerge
[Guest]: and people will move so quickly from one to the other without actually having worked through
[Guest]: the important things that came up in that in the first issue to begin with.
[Amit Varma]: Three things I'll kind of want to double click here on and one is that, you know, you pointed
[Amit Varma]: out that people make their own journey, which is, of course, true. You know, we all make
[Amit Varma]: mistakes in our youth. Sometimes you're impatient, sometimes you're impetuous. Sometimes we flit
[Amit Varma]: from idea to idea, approach to approach, we find out what works. But what people in our
[Amit Varma]: generation have done is that a lot of this has not been in public. A lot of this has
[Amit Varma]: been in private, where we have space to grow without having to take a position in public
[Amit Varma]: and without being scrutinized all the time. My worry today is that when a young 20 year
[Amit Varma]: old something spends two years taking particular positions, taking hardened lines, castigating
[Amit Varma]: others for not being pure enough, and so on and so forth, they themselves then get cast
[Amit Varma]: in that mold, as it were, and what they are at a particular point in time, they almost
[Amit Varma]: become that forever, because they've taken those public positions and they double down
[Amit Varma]: on it and they rationalize whatever holes they might be. Whereas in an earlier generation,
[Amit Varma]: you blunder from this end to that end, and you kind of, you know, you find your way around.
[Amit Varma]: The other thing is that this added element of cast is really interesting to me because
[Amit Varma]: you brought it up also during when you're talking about these bands on dance bars, where
[Amit Varma]: you talk about how there is this movement from seasoned feminists who are objecting
[Amit Varma]: to the band. And they are saying that look, all of these people involved are there of
[Amit Varma]: their own volition. They've consented to be there as it were, you are probably dispatching
[Amit Varma]: them to worse fates, which as you know, the excerpt I read out from your book shows did
[Amit Varma]: happen and therefore they are against the band. But then suddenly you have from the
[Amit Varma]: side Dalit feminists coming up and saying that, no, no, the band is good because understand
[Amit Varma]: that there are these structures and invariably and as you've pointed out throughout your
[Amit Varma]: book, there is a strong element of cast here as well. And invariably many of these sex
[Amit Varma]: workers are, you know, from the lower rungs over there and you have to take that into
[Amit Varma]: account. And there I think like my fundamental sympathy still lies with those who are opposing
[Amit Varma]: the band because it's a question of sort of means not ends that by taking away people's
[Amit Varma]: consent you can't possibly solve the problem that whereas I agree with the Dalit feminists
[Amit Varma]: about the structural issues, the issue becomes one of means of how do you address them? Is
[Amit Varma]: this the way to address them? Will this have unintended consequences which take these already
[Amit Varma]: unprivileged people to an even worse place as we know happened, you know, but that's
[Amit Varma]: that's a different matter. It doesn't matter where one is on that. But does that then make
[Amit Varma]: the task kind of harder where there are people coming up with entirely justified anger across
[Amit Varma]: all of these margins saying that, hey, you've ignored Dalits all this time or you ignore
[Amit Varma]: trans people all the time. And you can see where the anger is coming from. And obviously
[Amit Varma]: they have a point. But then the question becomes of how do you fight this beast that you are
[Amit Varma]: fighting and you have people within the mainstream feminist movement, institutional feminists
[Amit Varma]: perhaps like from the taking that race from you who have been fighting this for decades.
[Amit Varma]: They know the pace of change. They know what works and what doesn't work. They know that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, unintended consequences exist for everything. And there are others in a hurry
[Amit Varma]: because the world is changing so fast. How does one sort of reconcile that think about
[Amit Varma]: this? Is there scope for dialogue? Just, you know, if an outsider was to see those battles
[Amit Varma]: that are happening within the feminist camp at the time of Lohsha, for example, it would
[Amit Varma]: just seem really toxic at one level, the anger and the sort of the infighting that is going
[Amit Varma]: on where basically you're on the same page.
[Guest]: Yeah, I think there was a sociologist Geeta Chaddha called it a feminist civil war, you
[Guest]: know, in that phase. And the first question you asked, you know, about getting typecast
[Guest]: in a sense, right, you'll always be the if you've said something ignorant,
[Amit Varma]: Not just that you'll be typecast, but you will become that person, you'll solidify yourself,
[Amit Varma]: you'll stop growing. Because once you've taken that strong position on Twitter, once you
[Amit Varma]: and your gang have cancelled somebody also from your gang for not being pure enough,
[Amit Varma]: right, then by solid by taking such hard public stands, you almost commit yourself to becoming
[Amit Varma]: that person. And you're less fluid in a sense, well, otherwise, you would have continued
[Amit Varma]: to grow, go in different directions, and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: I don't I actually don't agree with that. I think that, you know, we do that when we
[Guest]: write also, right. So if I look at some of something I would have written 15 years back,
[Guest]: I have a different position, say, from, from what I would have now and mannequin my book
[Guest]: on, which is on women in the modeling industry is an example of that. Because when I, before
[Guest]: I started doing my research on the fashion and modeling industry, I was one of the women
[Guest]: who was against beauty pageants, and I would protest and etc, etc. And by the end, when
[Guest]: I came out the other side, I had a different understanding and view on objectification
[Guest]: and commodification of women. So even when you're writing something, or, you know, you
[Guest]: commit to something and then you can you change, right? I mean, that's the journey of, of anything,
[Guest]: any person who's thinking and studying and or just living through through times. So I
[Guest]: feel that the, you know, there is the danger I feel is that this leads to silence, right?
[Guest]: Those who do have good points to make and arguments to make, don't say anything, because
[Guest]: they don't want to be hounded. Because that's what it feels like at the end of the day,
[Guest]: right? It on Twitter and so on. It feels it's, it's, you feel wounded by the kind of animosity
[Guest]: and amplified sort of hatred that comes against you. And I think we're still working our way
[Guest]: through this. We don't know what, what will happen, you know, whether we will be able
[Guest]: to be resilient, resilient towards this and become the person who, you know, and stop
[Guest]: being identified as the person who once said that about that or something like that, you
[Guest]: know, JK Rowling, I don't know if she will ever be able to, to go back to that the standing
[Guest]: that she had because of her comments. Because she's now identified as what they call a TERF
[Guest]: or a trans exclusionary feminist, radical feminist. So I hope we are, I hope this is
[Guest]: a phase and I hope we are able to actually see that people change, people learn, people
[Guest]: grow. I mean, you know, we don't know so many things. And that's what I would say even for
[Guest]: people who have been in this business of change for so long. There's so much they don't know
[Guest]: and they realize it every single day, you know, every single and I think it was in your
[Guest]: episode, for example, with Rukmini that you had done on where she talks about how these
[Guest]: laws are being used against young people who are eloping. And it's not just that. I mean,
[Guest]: many groups in the movement also have been doing studies and finding that even work like,
[Guest]: you know, the child marriage law, for example, is used in exactly the same way. It's actually
[Guest]: used by parents to bring back girls who have eloped or against, you know, against such
[Guest]: choice marriages, you know, as we say. So, I mean, every, I mean, there's learning happening
[Guest]: everywhere. Nobody knows enough, honestly. I feel the question of, you know, Dalit sex
[Guest]: work and the Dalit feminists. So, this was again, this is a light bulb moment when this
[Guest]: realization that actually Dalit feminists, and for me, it was a moment at, it was the
[Guest]: National Autonomous Women's Movement Conference that this happened. And I've documented it
[Guest]: in one of the books and there are several books actually that have documented that moment,
[Guest]: which is a walkout by Dalit feminists when some of the bar dancers were part of the conference
[Guest]: and they came in one of the evening shows, they came and they performed on stage. And
[Guest]: that, and one of the sex workers rights movements, sort of leaders went and offered sort of did
[Guest]: a, you know, like you do in Shadis, you know, that kind of thing. And it just really started,
[Guest]: it pissed off a lot of people and it made it, already there was discomfort in the air
[Amit Varma]: because of the existing tension in the women's movement.
[Amit Varma]: But the Aarti kind of thing is a Brahmanical thing, right?
[Amit Varma]: No, it's with the money. It's like the...
[Amit Varma]: So, it's not got that connotation, the ritualistic connotation.
[Amit Varma]: It's an appreciation and you know, it's like a blessing.
[Guest]: But it just visibilized the act of money, giving money for dancing, basically, right?
[Guest]: So it made, it was like in your face and that triggered, already there were debates, etc
[Guest]: happening, right? Because there are divisions within the movement, those who feel that sex
[Guest]: work is labor versus those who feel that it is actually violence against women. But this
[Guest]: was like a very simplistic kind of understanding that was a legacy from the Western feminist
[Guest]: sex wars. And, you know, it had its own manifestation in the Indian context. But this was a new
[Guest]: element Dalit feminists saying that, look, this is caste based labor. Women in sex work
[Guest]: are predominantly Dalits and they are there because they are Dalits. And because it is
[Guest]: like manual scavenging or any other caste based occupation, would you be pro manual
[Guest]: scavenging? No, right? So then why are you pro bar dancing as livelihoods or sex work
[Guest]: as livelihoods? Because this is caste based labor. So this position was sort of, I think
[Guest]: it brought many feminists to a standstill because they hadn't seen it through that lens.
[Guest]: And this is true for many things. Now we see it through the lens of caste that we have
[Guest]: not really looked at before. For example, violence against girls. There are so many
[Guest]: cases of violence of girls in rural India, especially that now we see as caste based
[Guest]: violence, not only as gender based violence. So they are acts which are, you know, targeted
[Guest]: at a certain caste. So it is, these are changing lenses, but the dialogue that is possible,
[Guest]: I mean, honestly, it's a dialogue that I think can only be addressed by sex workers themselves
[Guest]: speaking about their choices, right? I cannot speak for them. Nobody else can speak for
[Guest]: Dalit sex workers who can talk about very matter. And I've heard them say in the most
[Guest]: beautiful ways, matter of factly, how many of them arrive through coercion, through caste
[Guest]: based exploitation and so on. And many of them don't. Many of them arrive there through
[Guest]: their own volition, their own journeys. It's only understandable in the context of their
[Guest]: own lives, in their life stories. So it is, I think, only through hearing voices of women
[Guest]: themselves, can we ever be convinced about things as, as emotional and as deep rooted
[Guest]: like child labor, or like sex work, you know, it's impossible otherwise, because we have
[Guest]: such fixed ideas of what is right and what's wrong around these things. Unless one hears
[Guest]: it from them, the people themselves, we're not going to be convinced.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, one of the things that makes Intimate City such a rich book is also that you have
[Amit Varma]: so many of these voices speaking in the book. And at one point, in fact, you write on this
[Amit Varma]: subject, rather than comparing sex work with manual scavenging or other forms of caste
[Amit Varma]: based exploitation, sex workers themselves often articulate a closer connection to domestic
[Amit Varma]: labor, placing sex work on the continuum of work that housewives do. And we'll of course
[Amit Varma]: dive deep into this later. But first, I want to kind of double click on that phrase that
[Amit Varma]: you mentioned about NGO-ization. And in your chapter on Kamathipura also, you give different
[Amit Varma]: reasons for the decline of Kamathipura. Of course, one is just real estate pressures
[Amit Varma]: and all of that. Then there is a fear of AIDS and so on. You know, then there is a clientele
[Amit Varma]: changing to sort of a lower class of client, which has less money to pay for that. But
[Amit Varma]: you also sort of talk about the NGO-ization of Kamathipura there, for example, and you
[Amit Varma]: write, quote, this led to hordes of anti-trafficking and HIV AIDS prevention NGOs setting a base
[Amit Varma]: in the area and undertaking programs focused on service delivery and welfare. The joke
[Amit Varma]: goes that you will find as many health workers and researchers in this area as you will find
[Amit Varma]: sex workers, stop quote. Taking that as an aside and just diving deeper into your point
[Amit Varma]: of NGO-ization. What did you mean by that? And what is the problem there? Like, I have
[Amit Varma]: obviously no familiarity with NGOs in this space. But the little familiarity I do see
[Amit Varma]: with NGOs in other spaces, my biggest sort of criticism is that when they begin, their
[Amit Varma]: incentives are that there's a problem in the real world, a social problem, and they want
[Amit Varma]: to solve it. But over time, funding becomes a main imperative. And therefore, the incentives
[Amit Varma]: are designed around the funding, they have to get the next round of funding, which therefore
[Amit Varma]: implies two things. And I'm talking about this in other fields, what I'm familiar with
[Amit Varma]: not your field at all. So and the fact that funding is a main imperative involves takes
[Amit Varma]: them in two directions. One, they have to paint the problem as worse than it actually
[Amit Varma]: is. And two, they have to show that they are making a difference of some sort or the other.
[Amit Varma]: Is that something that would carry through to the sort of NGOs that you've encountered
[Amit Varma]: in the field? And whether yes or no, you know, elaborate on NGO-ization? Because that's such
[Amit Varma]: an interesting phrase.
[Guest]: Yeah. Well, it's the, it refers to the broader context in which social work happens, or you
[Guest]: know, earlier, it used to be voluntary. But you cannot, you know, you can't expect people
[Guest]: to give their time without paying them also, right. So that's not so it's sort of a shift
[Guest]: from voluntary social work to professionalized services, right. So it's a, it's a, it's a
[Guest]: large shift. And it's, it has various elements to it. Funding is only one of the elements.
[Guest]: We know that NGOs through the pandemic, filled in the gaps where government has not, you
[Guest]: know, could not sort of do anything, or did not do anything. And it's true for all fields.
[Guest]: Like I, I cannot imagine if there were no NGOs in many of the places I visit, what people
[Guest]: would do, honestly, there is such infrastructural neglect. Even if, you know, young people are
[Guest]: not going to schools or colleges, they are being, you know, through programs, they're
[Guest]: learning life skills, they're having opportunities to play sports, they're doing all kinds of
[Guest]: things that they would not otherwise. So I mean, this is in addition to I mean, a lot
[Guest]: of the NGOs that I have seen do a lot of perspective building. So really bringing people together
[Guest]: to make sense of their lives, to really improve the quality of people's lives. There are all
[Guest]: kinds of NGOs, of course, there are those that are very service delivery oriented. There
[Guest]: are two to facilitating, you know, access to your entitlements, helping you get on,
[Guest]: you know, your Aadhaar cards, and so on, or NREGA cards. There are those that really enable
[Guest]: people to join the panchayat, women to join the panchayat. So there are, you know, very
[Guest]: specific fields, I feel that we would be bereft without the kinds of contributions that NGOs
[Guest]: do, however, they are quite demonized. And that the history of that is, is really comes
[Guest]: from a long time back from the Congress period, actually, where there's a suspicion of foreign
[Guest]: funding, really supporting anti government activities, and so on. So that has that strain
[Guest]: has continued. I feel that the NGOization also means that there is a, you know, we have
[Guest]: social work schools, we have women's studies centers. Now, we have all kinds of interdisciplinary
[Guest]: centers that train people to work in the development sector. So it is an acknowledgement of the
[Guest]: lack of development. Actually, that's what the NGOization is a response to the entrenched
[Guest]: lack of development, which we have seen in our country and around the world. And the
[Guest]: fact that you need expertise to really handle this challenge, the massiveness of this challenge,
[Guest]: right. So which is why you have developmental professionals now, who are parts of NGOs.
[Guest]: Maybe they should not be called NGOs, maybe they should be called the social sector or
[Guest]: you know, and now increasingly there are models of, you know, social enterprise, for example.
[Guest]: There are models in which there are for profit companies who are doing social oriented, social
[Guest]: change oriented work. So there are shifts happening there as well. I feel that this
[Guest]: idea of having to have funding. Well, what else if you're a non-profit, where will you
[Guest]: get the funds from? It's like, it's a vicious cycle, right? How will you pay your staff?
[Guest]: Why should staff work for such low salaries? And they are really low. I mean, I don't know
[Guest]: how people survive on these salaries and funding organizations often don't pay for and it's
[Guest]: not sustainable because funding cycles are in small, small sort of two-year, three-year
[Guest]: or whatever, sometimes yearly. So you cannot have long-term employment. So in a sense there
[Guest]: is an, and you spoke about the informal sector, but what I was thinking about is that the
[Guest]: informalization of every sector has happened. It is not just the informal sector, the corporate
[Guest]: sector, there are jobs which are not permanent jobs anymore. We don't have the idea of permanent.
[Guest]: Everything is a temp job, honestly. Everything is contract based. So there is an informalization
[Guest]: across the board, whether it's the corporate sector, whether it's the NGO sector. So there
[Guest]: is an informalization that exists in the sector. But these are problems I feel which are not
[Guest]: only in the NGO sector. You know, they are really across the board. And even if we look
[Guest]: at the gig economy and the kind of low pay that exists, the gig economy has emerged actually
[Guest]: because of this informalization of the corporate sector. So there is a broader, I mean, economists
[Guest]: must be looking at this. I don't know, but the NGOization is something that I do, I agree
[Guest]: that NGOs struggle with because it's pushed them to a corner where yes, they have to support
[Guest]: the staff that they have. They cannot withdraw from programs or interventions they have started
[Guest]: on the ground, right? Because that's often the only thing that exists in rural areas,
[Guest]: in the areas and communities they work in. They are the ones people turn to for whatever
[Guest]: violence, disenfranchisement that they face. So I mean, it seems like unless, you know,
[Guest]: unless they work together to really push for state accountability, to have systems that
[Guest]: work better. There are many systems that work. There are many systems that are pushed to
[Guest]: work and depends, it differs from state to state, district to district. I mean, you know,
[Guest]: if the collector is good and so on, it's the same old story, right? Many changes happen
[Guest]: in districts quickly. But until those systemic changes happen, we're not going to resolve
[Guest]: in a sense this problem. The issue is also that the state and NGOs are often at the local
[Guest]: level, they work together closely, actually, because they, the state actually can't do
[Guest]: without NGOs in most places. But at the macro level, there is this bit of a standoff and
[Guest]: so it's actually very nuanced and different at different levels.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, I didn't mean to imply for a moment that NGOs are a bad thing. I mean,
[Amit Varma]: as you would have heard in my episode with Kavita, which just released yesterday, which
[Amit Varma]: is why you mentioned it. You know, I'm for anything that civil society does that involves
[Amit Varma]: voluntary action. It could be through the mechanism of free markets, it could be through
[Amit Varma]: NGOs. The fact is, the state most often is going to let us down. So, you know, whatever
[Amit Varma]: civil society does is great and NGOs are one way. My sort of mention of the imperatives
[Amit Varma]: of funding and the incentives that they lead to was not to imply something malign but to
[Amit Varma]: point to something tragic, that therefore you get imprisoned by those imperatives and
[Amit Varma]: they can divert you from whatever your core direction is. Like what would happen for example,
[Amit Varma]: in a marketplace, in a free marketplace where there is no cronyism, is that a company can
[Amit Varma]: only make a profit by fulfilling the need of whoever its customers are. Therefore, it
[Amit Varma]: is making people in society better off and that's the only way to make money and therefore
[Amit Varma]: there I see the incentives are completely aligned. In the social sector, it's complicated
[Amit Varma]: because it doesn't work like that. And so this is not something I have an answer to,
[Amit Varma]: but this is something that can, I sense and with NGOs that I'm familiar with in other
[Amit Varma]: fields and I won't take names, I see this as a problem that they get into this area
[Amit Varma]: of ticking boxes, that once they become big, like any big company does, they'll have these
[Amit Varma]: departments, they'll do separate things, each department will take boxes, they'll do this
[Amit Varma]: much on social media, they'll have an Instagram page, they'll do this outreach and so on and
[Amit Varma]: so forth. But in the end, no one's really passionate anymore about, you know, what the
[Amit Varma]: core cause is, that's been forgotten, the founders have probably gone somewhere else
[Amit Varma]: and I kind of see that happening. But otherwise, I totally agree with you, we would be bereft
[Amit Varma]: without them as we would be bereft if people in civil society didn't help each other, that's
[Guest]: what we do. Yeah, I mean, I think what you're referring to is actually bureaucracy. It's
[Guest]: that we, you know, and it's a way of working that we know, right? So our NGOs are also
[Guest]: just learning from people around us, right? So the institutions and organizations that
[Guest]: we create are not, you know, those fun organizations. I mean, there was a time when there were collectives,
[Guest]: they were small, many of them, you're right, when an organization grows to a certain size,
[Guest]: it becomes a beast of its own, right? And this is the issue with startups as well, I
[Guest]: would say, right? So this is an institutional problem, I feel that this is what happens
[Guest]: when you create an institution, and you have to keep on running it, running it, running
[Guest]: it. And I feel like the problem is that our template is that of a bureaucratic template
[Guest]: with different departments, this, that and the other. I wonder if we completely, you
[Guest]: know, like, scrapped it all to the ground, and we just gave it to a bunch of young people
[Guest]: and said, here, you do what you want with it. This is the heart. This was the vision
[Guest]: that we had. And can you, you do what you want with it, you can change, you can have
[Guest]: your own vision, you know, which is why I mean, this question of diversity in, in hiring,
[Guest]: why is it why I feel it's so important, it is important to have Dalits, Muslims, trans
[Guest]: people, young people, people with disabilities, all kinds of really, you know, groups represented
[Guest]: in an organization, because they bring different visions, and they bring different energies,
[Guest]: of course. But something holds us back. And I hear you on that, you know, that it becomes
[Guest]: something like a stone around your neck, that we are not able to move away from old ways
[Guest]: of building institutions and tending to them. And, you know, so that's the, I agree with
[Amit Varma]: you that.
[Amit Varma]: You know, and I agree with you on the diversity bit in the sense that I keep citing these
[Amit Varma]: studies, I first learned about them from Philip Tetlock's book, super forecasting, we showed
[Amit Varma]: that for any firm, the single biggest factor in good decision making is not intelligence,
[Amit Varma]: however, you measure it or education or whatever it is diversity, the more diverse a group
[Amit Varma]: you have, the better decisions you'll get. And that's actually commonsensical. And I
[Amit Varma]: remember another study a while back, I don't, I don't remember where I saw this. But if
[Amit Varma]: I find it, I'll link it in the show notes, we showed that companies that are less diverse
[Amit Varma]: actually do worse in the US, this was purely in a US context, they just perform worse in
[Amit Varma]: the marketplace, which you would expect from the previous study, because hey, after all,
[Amit Varma]: you're taking worse decisions. So I think diversity is something that can come about
[Amit Varma]: that should come about from companies themselves in a voluntary way in their own self interest.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, leaving sort of that aside, you know, before we start talking about your
[Amit Varma]: book, which we'll do after the break, I want to kind of go back on the biographical journey
[Amit Varma]: that you know, you've sort of your third eye has opened, or you've had your light bulb
[Amit Varma]: moments and you've decided this is what I want to do. At this point in time, in the
[Amit Varma]: mid 90s, who are your models? Who are you looking at? Like I can imagine it being easy
[Amit Varma]: for you to find intellectual models today, great books to read, we show you the way forward
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth. You can go on YouTube and watch a bazaar discussions between people
[Amit Varma]: who have achieved a lot in these fields. In the mid 90s, you don't really have all that
[Amit Varma]: and I would assume that some influences would perhaps be local ones, people you see in action,
[Amit Varma]: who you find inspiring. So both in terms of intellectual frameworks, which could be books,
[Amit Varma]: which could be whatever, and in terms of people who you look at and say that I want to live
[Amit Varma]: a life like that, I want to do things like that, that's the kind of person I want to
[Amit Varma]: be. So who were your models in that sense? And it's almost ironic, I'm asking a question
[Amit Varma]: about models, given that your first book was mannequins.
[Guest]: So in the 90s, I mean, I would really say books, honestly, there was still old feminist
[Guest]: classics, because I was encountering feminism for the first time. And that time I was, I
[Guest]: mean, everybody in the movement used to smoke. So you know, the smokers area was near the
[Guest]: racks of the library, the library, basically, which was in the outdoors area. And so, you
[Guest]: know, smoking breaks would be like, going up and down the book rack and really sort
[Guest]: of really getting a sense of this ocean of literature, you know, feminist classics, which
[Guest]: were around me. And so really reading those kinds of books, I would say Betty Friedan,
[Guest]: Betty Friedan's book, especially her essay, The Problem with No Name, where she talks
[Guest]: about housewifery in America, and how women would go to sleep at night after doing the
[Guest]: day of, you know, taking their kids to school and, you know, preparing their husband's meals
[Guest]: and lying in bed at night and thinking, is this it? Is this the end of the dream? And,
[Guest]: you know, the way she put it, what really was remarkable, the way that she had written
[Guest]: it also. So I think books were very significant, especially feminist classics, I think, around
[Guest]: me, I had feminist greats at that time, Kamla Basin very much, you know, was a part of which
[Guest]: was one of the founders of Jaggery, there were many others, Abha Bhaiya, there were
[Guest]: many who I would say, influenced my journey. But other than that, I think it was actually
[Guest]: honestly a sense of just community friendships that you had. And, you know, you saw everybody
[Guest]: struggling. I mean, you met people who had run away from home, who had tried to create
[Guest]: their own lives, you, I did casework where I, where I learned that I'm not cut out for
[Guest]: casework. So one of my first tasks was actually to help, you know, dowry victims in Safdarjung
[Guest]: Burns Ward, Safdarjung Hospital Burns Ward to actually file their police complaints.
[Guest]: And in another situation, I was, I would go every Tuesday to Dakshinpuri, which was an
[Guest]: urban slum. And there used to be a single women's group there. And they used to have
[Guest]: their meetings on Tuesday nights, where women would come together to talk about their, the
[Guest]: problems and they would resolve cases that had come to them and so on. So I would spend
[Guest]: the night in Dakshinpuri at my colleague's house. And so those kinds of everyday experiences,
[Guest]: I would say was really the, creates that emotional, very strong emotional tapestry, you know,
[Guest]: on which you then start sort of exploring things and you start experiencing what other
[Guest]: people are experiencing, you know, some empathy, wires of empathy sort of open up and you're
[Guest]: able to connect to other people through that. So I think that and I think just the practice
[Guest]: of research, honestly. So for me, that became a very alive wire to connect to other people's
[Guest]: lives, to other conceptual frameworks. And it became sort of a feed, feeding system for
[Guest]: me to grow. And yeah, I'm trying to think if there were any other people. But no, I
[Guest]: don't think I've been a very role model oriented person, much more drawn to ideas and conceptual
[Guest]: frameworks than anything else.
[Amit Varma]: And are there any more light bulb moments for yourself that you can remember something
[Amit Varma]: that you believe then which you suddenly stop believing because something went off in your
[Guest]: head?
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, as you were saying light bulb moment, I actually remember that experience.
[Guest]: And this is one of my first experiences with sex workers. It was a training in Khandala
[Guest]: with the sex workers group. And they were an anti-trafficking group, actually. And it
[Guest]: was a group of sex workers from there. And I'd gone again, I was not the main trainer,
[Guest]: I was just the assistant, I was going to write the report, etc. And Abha was the main trainer.
[Guest]: And there you have an exercise, you know, where you, it's a common exercise in feminist
[Guest]: trainings, which is called the pleasure and pain exercise. Basically, you have this massive,
[Guest]: you stick two sheets of chart paper together, and one of the women will lay down on it and
[Guest]: we'll draw her silhouette, we'll draw around her. Someone will draw and leads to a lot
[Guest]: of giggling because you know, she's getting tickled and all of that. And then once her
[Guest]: map is sort of drawn on the sheet, she'll get up and everybody will be given two pens.
[Guest]: And it's one, so if it's blue and red, blue will be points of pain, and red, you mark
[Guest]: points of pleasure on that body map. So everybody will think about it and then they'll mark
[Guest]: okay, this is a point of pleasure on my body, this is a point of pain on my body. And the
[Guest]: intention is actually to use this exercise and entry point to talk about health, to talk
[Guest]: about really the body, awareness of the body, and so on, and open up, you know, that sort
[Guest]: of conversation. And when we did this exercise over there with the sex workers, I don't know
[Guest]: what I had imagined, I had imagined that maybe they will know much more about their bodies.
[Guest]: But the responses were exactly the same as any other rural women, you know, then I realized
[Guest]: that they know as little about their body and health, sexual health, and so on as anyone
[Guest]: else. And so for me, that was a light bulb moment about my own presumptions, as well
[Guest]: as the fact that, hey, hold on, stop looking at them as sex workers. These are single women,
[Guest]: they are poor women, they are single mothers, many of them are Dalit women, you have to
[Guest]: see them, you know, beyond this identity that you've come in with as sex workers. And of
[Guest]: course, there's the realization that the prejudices we carry with us, you know, it was a stupid
[Guest]: assumption to think that they would know more about their body than any other women.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and there's another on the same themes, this profound passage from your book, again,
[Amit Varma]: which points to one of those possible light bulb moments for others where you write, quote,
[Amit Varma]: take for example, this comment by a well known porn star in Wendy Chapkis's book, Life Sex
[Amit Varma]: Acts, which significantly shifted my own view of sex work. And now the quote begins, work
[Amit Varma]: is work, you have good days and bad days. But my worst day at work is still better than
[Amit Varma]: the best day selling shoes at Kinney's, stop quote, and which is again, so sort of thought
[Amit Varma]: provoking in different ways. And we'll come back to that and to the book after a quick
[Amit Varma]: commercial break. Long before I was a podcaster, I was a writer. In fact, chances are that
[Amit Varma]: many of you first heard of me because of my blog India Uncut, which was active between
[Amit Varma]: 2003 and 2009 and became somewhat popular at the time. I love the freedom the form gave
[Amit Varma]: me and I feel I was shaped by it in many ways. I exercise my writing muscle every day and
[Amit Varma]: was forced to think about many different things because I wrote about many different things.
[Amit Varma]: Well, that phase in my life ended for various reasons. And now it is time to revive it.
[Amit Varma]: Only now I'm doing it through a newsletter. I have started the India Uncut newsletter
[Amit Varma]: at indiancut.substack.com where I will write regularly about whatever catches my fancy.
[Amit Varma]: I'll write about some of the themes I cover in this podcast and about much else. So please
[Amit Varma]: do head on over to indiancut.substack.com and subscribe. It is free. Once you sign up,
[Amit Varma]: each new installment that I write will land up in your email inbox. You don't need to
[Amit Varma]: go anywhere. So subscribe now for free. The India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm chatting with Manjuma Bhattacharya and we've
[Amit Varma]: kind of gone through a significant chunk of your personal journey. But before we talk
[Amit Varma]: about your book Intimacy, which I want to talk about at some length because I loved
[Amit Varma]: it so much and it's got so much in it that is thought provoking. I want to continue with
[Amit Varma]: the personal journey a bit to take you to your first book Mannequin. How did that sort
[Amit Varma]: of come about? Like take me through then. I imagine it's in the mid 90s, the second
[Amit Varma]: half of the 90s that you got into activism and feminism and so on and so forth. So what
[Amit Varma]: was that journey like from reaching a point where you said that, okay, one, I will write
[Amit Varma]: a book and two, I will write a book about this.
[Guest]: That book came out of my PhD. So it was actually the PhD that that I did on. So the intention
[Guest]: for the PhD was really to look at globalization, women and work. Because by now I'd been working
[Guest]: with Chaguri, I would go to sort of college in the mornings, I was doing my MA in sociology
[Guest]: at JNU and then I would go to work in the afternoons at Chaguri. So that was sort of
[Guest]: the rhythm of life. I think in that period, I was working a lot on migration and trafficking
[Guest]: at that time, which was really trying to understand whether, you know, really trying to understand
[Guest]: how trafficking was defined, like was it really, women were moving of their own volition, right?
[Guest]: And they were entering into very unsafe migrations that ultimately ended up being trafficking
[Guest]: in a sense into various kinds of labor, sex work, domestic work, factory work, and so
[Guest]: on, different kinds of labor. So my interest in women and labor was increasing. And I wanted
[Guest]: to study that. I wanted to actually study what kinds of work women were doing in post
[Guest]: globalization India. For example, there were a lot of women who were coming to work in
[Guest]: export processing zones. It was a huge chunk of young women coming to work in factories
[Guest]: in export processing zones. There were young women coming from say Jharkhand, etc, to work
[Guest]: as live in domestic help in Delhi. So there were flows that were happening and there were
[Guest]: a lot of young women who were participating in beauty pageants and who were becoming models.
[Guest]: So I think, you know, I wanted to sort of look at these various kinds of flows that
[Guest]: were happening. And my committee at JNU said it was too much. So I had to choose one. I
[Guest]: chose women in the modeling industry, finally, as the area I wanted to study because there
[Guest]: was nothing on it. It was actually completely barren in that sense, academically. And there
[Guest]: was also an interesting sort of moment, right? Because there was the anti-beauty pageant
[Guest]: rallies, etc, that had taken place. 1996, when I had joined was when the Miss World
[Guest]: beauty pageant in Bangalore had seen all these protests. And even though there were three
[Guest]: different kinds of streams of protest, there was the left protesting against globalization
[Guest]: primarily, which was, I mean, they were like they protested Kentucky Fried Chicken, they
[Guest]: were protesting the Miss World pageant. Then you had the right wing, they were protesting
[Guest]: degradation of Indian culture, breakdown of Indian culture, that kind of thing. And then
[Guest]: the third stream was actually feminists who were objecting to the commodification of women
[Guest]: and they were objecting. So their slogan was, khaane ko nahi roti, dhoondne chale beauty.
[Guest]: So their issue was that what are the priorities of the government? You know, why is the state
[Guest]: government supporting this and putting money into this, whereas they should be focusing
[Guest]: on other things and the concern that the middle class did not have a sense of, you know, looking
[Guest]: good was not a priority, etc. And that this would change that. This would bring, open
[Guest]: up India as a market for beauty and Indian women would be targets of that market, which
[Guest]: all did happen. But these three different nuanced positions was all brushed, it was
[Guest]: all made into one broad protest, which was against, actually, it was framed as a protest
[Guest]: against the bikini, bikini round. And the bikini round was moved to the seashells and,
[Guest]: you know, things continued sort of thing. But for the women's movement, it was an important
[Guest]: turning point because it made them really reflect on this idea of beauty and so on.
[Guest]: So I think I was, I joined the movement exactly as you said at that time, when in the shadow
[Guest]: of this kind of tension, where there were the women inside the, you know, who were participating
[Guest]: in the patent and there were the women outside who were protesting the patent and I was with
[Guest]: organizations who have been protesting outside. So for me also, it was a question in my mind,
[Guest]: why would women participate in something that is not in their interest, in a sense, right?
[Guest]: So that was my research question. And when you're doing research, you have to, I mean,
[Guest]: it is hard to actually arrive at a good research question. And for me, this was the one that
[Guest]: made sense for me. So with this research question, I sort of entered the PhD. So that was the
[Guest]: PhD. The book came at another point in time, actually, when I had moved from Delhi to here
[Guest]: to Bombay. And I mean, I had always wanted to write a book, I'd been recommended even
[Guest]: by the examiners that this should be a book, etc. But then I got, I finally got this amazing
[Guest]: grant from the New India Foundation. It was a fellowship that sort of gives you a salary
[Guest]: for a year to sit and write a book. This is 2009. I'm talking about 2009, 10, something
[Guest]: like that. And that's when I realized, okay, I can actually take time, I took a small office
[Guest]: and I shared it with someone with another colleague who was a consultant. And that's
[Guest]: when I actually started writing the book. And I just had my second child then. And so
[Guest]: I was, I really needed a space where I could go and write. And I realized when I thought,
[Guest]: okay, one year, that's good enough, you know, I already have a written PhD. But then when
[Guest]: I started, I realized that, okay, I cannot use a single word from the PhD, I have to
[Guest]: rewrite everything from scratch. When you're writing a PhD, you're writing for people who
[Guest]: know more than you about a subject. When you're writing for the layperson, you're writing
[Guest]: for someone who knows nothing about that issue, actually, you have to assume. It was a completely
[Guest]: different, it took me six months to realize that actually what I had was unusable, I'd
[Guest]: have to start again. And that's when I then I started writing in a different way using
[Guest]: a different sort of craft, in a sense, you know, and really, and by then I had learned
[Guest]: a little bit how to write for a lay audience. Because when I moved to Bombay, I came here
[Guest]: without, I mean, you know, if you don't know Marathi, it's very difficult to work at the
[Guest]: community level. So I was doing consultancies, etc. But one of the things I was doing was
[Guest]: writing. And I was writing, I was lucky that Nonita Kalra at Elle, who was the editor of
[Guest]: Elle at that time, Satya Saran, who was then doing a magazine called Me for DNA. And Nina
[Guest]: Martiris, who was with the Sunday Times, Times of India, you know, they would, they gave
[Guest]: me work, I mean, they gave me opportunities to write pieces that were based in research,
[Guest]: but for a lay audience. So then I had, I was developing a practice of writing for a lay
[Guest]: audience. So thanks to that, I had, I had some, I had started a journey. And so then
[Guest]: I've, you know, that book took a long time, I mean, Mannequin took a long time to write,
[Guest]: because it wasn't just, I wasn't only doing that, I was doing so many things, I was, you
[Guest]: know, raising kids, I was finding work, I was all those kinds of things. So that year
[Guest]: of fellowship was very important. But then there are other sort of practical life coming
[Guest]: in the way kind of situations also, which meant that it only was published in 2018,
[Guest]: which is like nine years later. And two of those were with, when it was sort of with
[Guest]: another, another publishing house, and just sort of lay there, it didn't really move,
[Guest]: which is when I withdrew it from there. But there are other things that happened that
[Guest]: made the book really come alive. For example, motivation by Jerry Pinto, who I met through
[Guest]: my friend and colleague, Bishaka Dutta, who insisted that I write 1000 words a week, I
[Guest]: think, and send it to him. Whether he read it or not, I don't know. But every week I
[Guest]: was supposed to send him 1000 words. And that made me, that pushed me to actually develop
[Guest]: a practice of writing and trot out that first draft, which is the most, it's the hardest
[Guest]: thing to have that first draft, then you can keep shaping it and, you know, crafting it
[Guest]: and, and that's the bit I love. But that horrible first draft was really thanks to Jerry's,
[Guest]: you know, insistence. And so anyway, these are the sort of nitty gritties. But that's
[Guest]: how that particular book came about. And I think those nine years were important, because
[Guest]: I initially I started out writing a book about women working in the modeling industry. By
[Guest]: the end of it, it was a book about fashion and feminism. So the aboutness of that book
[Guest]: changed as I kept thinking about it, and sort of packing it like, you know, very long, dumb
[Guest]: biryani kind of thing, you know, it just got it changed in flavor. And I'm, I'm so glad
[Guest]: it did, you know. And it was also one of those moments, you know, I think I went to the loo
[Guest]: and I sat down and I was like, it just came to me after all those years that oh my god,
[Guest]: my book is about me and as most books are, but it's really about me and my journey in
[Guest]: fashion and feminism. And it is about my changed thinking about these things.
[Amit Varma]: There's a bunch of places I want to dive in here. And it's interesting, you said that
[Amit Varma]: the first draft was the hardest and the rest, like one of the blurbs on your book I noticed
[Amit Varma]: was by Sonia Falero, a good friend of mine, and you know her as well, I'm guessing, right?
[Amit Varma]: So you know, she'd written Beautiful Thing, which was on the bar dancers of Mumbai. And
[Amit Varma]: I remember that she wrote some four or five drafts of that, and I saw all of them and
[Amit Varma]: they were all completely different from each other. So it's not like she's done one draft
[Amit Varma]: and she's, you know, moved paras around and cut things here and there. She just wrote
[Amit Varma]: every draft from scratch, your main characters change, they were completely different. It
[Amit Varma]: was just an insane kind of work ethic, which I can't quite imagine. And that's sort of
[Amit Varma]: my next question to you. Like many years back, a writer called Mason Curry came out with
[Amit Varma]: a book called Daily Rituals, and got a tremendous amount of flack because what he covered in
[Amit Varma]: it was a habits of artists and writers, but all of them were male. And the criticism correctly
[Amit Varma]: was that, listen, there's a different kind of privilege at play here because many men
[Amit Varma]: are able to shut themselves in a room for four hours in a day and say, don't disturb
[Amit Varma]: me and do their thing. But women don't really work like that. And then Curry to his credit
[Amit Varma]: came out with another book called Daily Rituals, Women at Work. What was it like for you? Because
[Amit Varma]: you've got a couple of kids, you've got guessing your consultancy or daytime gig, whatever
[Amit Varma]: it is, plus you're writing articles for all of these people. And you're trying to write
[Amit Varma]: this book 1000 words a week at a time and got Del Sherry Pinto for motivating you to
[Amit Varma]: do this. So what, how were your processes like? How would you manage to kind of get
[Amit Varma]: that mind space where you can sit down and actually get some writing done?
[Guest]: Both my husband and I, our writing happened at the dining table primarily. I mean, that's
[Guest]: just the way it was. I, you know, it's a luxury to imagine that one can go away somewhere
[Guest]: and write, etc, etc. I will say that it happened only because of the kindness of family, friends,
[Guest]: help and so on. So the reality is that, you know, like even when I went for a writing
[Guest]: workshop as late as 2016, my in-laws came and, you know, spent two weeks, you know,
[Guest]: with my kids, so I could go. Even when I was doing my PhD, my mother came and stayed for
[Guest]: two months to sort of look after my daughter while I would go to Teen Murthy in the day
[Guest]: and work on my PhD. So finding a space has always been very hard and which is why the
[Guest]: grant from New India, New India Foundation was so important and that office was so important
[Guest]: even for just for that one year. So it's, it's extremely challenging and it's not just
[Guest]: male writers. I think male anthropologists and sociologists, you know, this idea of that
[Guest]: people can go away for a year and nobody will need them. They can go off to a village and
[Guest]: do their research and, you know, come back with this genius piece of work. It's like
[Guest]: quite, it's so gendered, right? Because can you, I can't imagine being away from home
[Guest]: like, you know, for more than a certain period of time, with no doorbells to answer, etc,
[Guest]: it's, it has been very hard. And it's, it has been at the cost of many things, a very
[Guest]: untidy house, you know, really not really caring at some point, you have to drop the
[Guest]: ball on many things, you can't be a super woman. I also realized it's important to,
[Guest]: to really be honest with everyone that, you know, I have, this is important to me, I want
[Guest]: to do this. Everybody understands and appreciates that. I think, you know, I have clear channels
[Guest]: of communication with everyone, including my partner, Saurabh, who's very, who is completely,
[Guest]: you know, full participant in house care. And I wonder how it is for those who have
[Guest]: to do everything without the sharing that is possible or needs to happen for real work
[Guest]: to emerge. I don't know if these books would have been better off if I had gone away somewhere.
[Guest]: And I did do a workshop for two weeks, where I went to Chamonix, where I was telling you
[Guest]: about that, you know, for two weeks, I did this writing workshop, and I've never gone
[Guest]: for a workshop before. But I gave myself permission. And I said, Look, I'm going to, I can do it,
[Guest]: you know, I don't have to feel guilty about it, I can do it, I can go away for two weeks
[Guest]: and really try and understand craft differently. Because as academics, we are not really taught
[Guest]: craft, right? We have expertise in a subject, but not the craft of writing per se, which
[Guest]: is much more intuitive and something I can do intuitively. But I would like to know more
[Guest]: about the craft. So it was my first experience. It was a wonderful workshop, where I was with
[Guest]: other MFA sort of writers, it was in the American tradition of giving very constructive, compassionate
[Guest]: feedback to each other's chapter. But it was a luxury. And I don't think I can keep doing
[Guest]: it. I've done it once, I don't know when I would be able to do it again. But the thing
[Guest]: is that it was very important, because I learned from fiction writers, how to craft a scene,
[Guest]: for example, how to, I understood from reading their work, how they were approaching their
[Guest]: work, how dialogue is just written. I mean, you know, on separate lines, such a simple
[Guest]: thing. But it's something that, as a reader, you don't really notice it sometimes, you
[Guest]: know, or how you build a character, or, you know, what each sentence, the rhythm of each
[Guest]: sentence, how each sentence sounds, those kind of things I really realized were important.
[Guest]: And so when I went back with this fresh eye, I was able to really apply it in a new way
[Guest]: to my work. But here also, I feel like, you know, I gave myself permission to go out and
[Guest]: do this. And it was a big leap for me. I came back thinking that, oh, how wonderful it would
[Guest]: be to have this kind of an opportunity or, you know, to create what I had called the
[Guest]: XOXO hugs and kisses, hugs and kisses, kind of a workshop for women to write in. And,
[Guest]: and I shopped it around, I sent it around to a few publishers, but it didn't pick up
[Guest]: at that time. But, I mean, I would love, I think it's a great opportunity to, if publishers
[Guest]: could actually create these kinds of spaces for women to come together and read and write.
[Guest]: I did try one more time when I, when I was writing Intimate City to go away and write
[Guest]: somewhere. Okay, so, but that was a hilarious, I mean, it was a big flop, I would say. I
[Guest]: went to Karjat. I thought, let me take a few days and I will go away from everyone and
[Guest]: I will go and write. Okay. I went. There was nobody there. I was the only person staying
[Guest]: in that place. There was one woman who would teach me how to do clay work, pottery work,
[Guest]: etc. And the rest of the time I would have on my own. It was really spooky. And I just
[Guest]: could not get even one word down, you know. And then it just got worse and worse. And
[Guest]: then I wonder, I think the second day or third day, I woke up in the morning and I looked
[Guest]: outside my window and I hadn't put my glasses on yet in the morning, but I could tell that
[Guest]: there was a dog outside my door. And I could tell just by looking at it that it was not
[Guest]: alive. You know, it was like a, like a sack of fur just laying there. And I was so spooked.
[Guest]: And I had never seen something like that before. And I realized that, my God, there is some,
[Guest]: even without my glasses, I could make out that there is no life force in that, you know.
[Guest]: And I was very, very shaken by that experience. And I thought, okay, this is not happening.
[Guest]: So I cut it short and I went back home. But it was, what that did do is that I read massively
[Guest]: in those few days. I couldn't put a word down. But I finished a book and I made a clay crocodile,
[Guest]: which I called Sultan and I brought that home. And I mean, it was one of those really strange
[Guest]: experiences which showed me what life, what life force looks like. And I don't know why
[Guest]: that dog came and, you know, came outside my door and passed away. It was, I can't say
[Guest]: it gave me some major aha thing, but it really made me experience something called life force.
[Guest]: And that I came back with a sense of appreciating, you know, the something supernatural. And
[Guest]: I'm, I'm not a believer per se, but I felt that I witnessed something or had a moment
[Guest]: there that, you know, I'm reading a book, a book called Thin Places, which is about,
[Guest]: you know, like those moments in life when there's a very thin membrane between one world
[Guest]: and another, you know, in that sense. And for me, that was like a thin place, you know,
[Guest]: where I felt like some osmosis was happening at that moment. It sounds odd to say, but
[Guest]: I mean, if I'm, you know, that was the other time that I tried to find an alone, alone
[Guest]: time to write. And I went back and I realized that, no, I mean, a room of your own is good
[Guest]: enough. You don't need to go away. A room of your own is a dream for many of us, especially
[Guest]: in Bombay. Yeah, but writing in the, you know, busyness of everyday life, I think it seeps
[Guest]: into your work and it has its power and impact also. But yes, I would like there to be spaces
[Guest]: where I get to think. I mean, it's such a luxury. I would love to be a thinking, you
[Amit Varma]: know, like a writer that just writes someday. You know, I just think that these five minutes
[Amit Varma]: where you spoke about that time in Garjat are going to be among my favorite five minutes
[Amit Varma]: of the show ever. And you should really, I mean, it would make for such a lovely novella,
[Amit Varma]: you know, just the feeling of things without spelling anything out too much, just this
[Amit Varma]: notion of this membrane between. And what's Sultan up to these days?
[Guest]: Sultan has unfortunately lost a limb in onerous dusting that has been done by, but
[Amit Varma]: I shouldn't have asked that question. Part of the charm is kind of gone. But this was
[Amit Varma]: this is just such a lovely story in this kind of so much there. You spoke about, you know,
[Amit Varma]: having to consciously train yourself to come out of an academic way of thinking and about
[Amit Varma]: taking influences from fiction of how to build narrative, how to get into character, how
[Amit Varma]: to write dialogue and all of that. Tell me a little bit about this. Tell me a little
[Amit Varma]: bit of, you know, that journey in finding the voice of the book. Like I'm imagining
[Amit Varma]: that the voice of the book would be very, very different from the voice of the PhD thesis,
[Amit Varma]: right? So what was that sort of journey like? And do you, did you feel during that journey
[Amit Varma]: that you are also thinking in different slash better ways about the subject itself? Like
[Amit Varma]: there is such a close connection between writing and thinking in that sense, that just the
[Amit Varma]: act of writing, even if you're not, even if you're just daily journaling and you're not
[Amit Varma]: writing about anything in particular, I mean, this is something Amitav Kumar spoke about
[Amit Varma]: in his episode with me at length, that if you just write every day, you are adding something
[Amit Varma]: to yourself with that little bit of reflection that happens, and you become a different person.
[Amit Varma]: And in your case, you're writing about the subject you mentioned before that you would
[Amit Varma]: once have looked at beauty pageants and the people who participated in them in a particular
[Amit Varma]: way. And by the end of the book, you looked at them in a completely different way. And
[Amit Varma]: these are perhaps two different journeys. One is a journey of your writing voice and
[Amit Varma]: how that evolved and how that changed you, perhaps. And the other is sort of a journey
[Amit Varma]: of how you think about the content itself. So tell me a little bit about these two and
[Amit Varma]: are they related in any way? Might not be the case, but tell me a little bit about these
[Guest]: two.
[Guest]: Cheryl Streed, who is, you know, she was one of the mentors on the workshop. And I remember
[Guest]: she said that the voice of a book, I mean, your voice on paper is the most relaxed expression
[Guest]: of yourself. And I love that term. And the thing in academia is that you're expected
[Guest]: to keep yourself away from your academic work, right? Because it's supposed to bias your
[Guest]: work in some way, right? It'll expose your biases and you're supposed to be objective.
[Guest]: So you try and keep yourself completely away from the text. But I mean, I think what was
[Guest]: different in Mannequin was that I put myself in the book, you know, and that's a radical
[Guest]: departure from academia in general, right? When I put myself in the book, the story changed.
[Guest]: That's when the story became about fashion and feminism, because it became about the
[Guest]: conflict between me and, you know, the women that who were supposedly on the opposite sort
[Guest]: of side. So this voice, I think, really comes with allowing yourself into your work. And
[Guest]: I feel that is, that's a strength that I feel I'm building, whether it was through Mannequin
[Guest]: and through Intimacy as well. The act of writing, for me, is very important to building theory.
[Guest]: It is through the act of writing and rewriting that I arrive at theory. As a sociologist,
[Guest]: actually it's important for me to arrive at theory. Actually, that is the difference between
[Guest]: a sociologist and an anthropologist who is very into detail and thick description, elements
[Guest]: of which, of course, are there. But the sociologist is expected to have grand theory. Now, I don't,
[Guest]: I'm not saying it's necessarily grand theory, but it is a trained, we are trained to search
[Guest]: for that theory at the end of the day. So, for example, for Mannequin, you know, I realized
[Guest]: as I was writing and rewriting all the stories of the women models that actually what I had
[Guest]: witnessed or what I was seeing was a new set of women were entering the workforce in this
[Guest]: period, you know, just like they had, say, post partition Bengal, when a lot of women
[Guest]: entered the workforce. I don't know if you've seen Mahanagar by Satyajit Ray. And so that,
[Guest]: you know, sort of shows it was a period when middle class women entered the workforce.
[Guest]: And so that is it, there was a similar moment, actually, that was happening in that 90s and
[Guest]: 2000s, when young women were joining the modeling industry, which is, they were the first generation
[Guest]: of their time to start working in the workflow, to migrate to another city, to live independently
[Guest]: on their own to find financial independence. So that's the, you know, that was for me,
[Guest]: that was the big pattern that I felt was being revealed to me. And it was only through the
[Guest]: act of writing that I find that I get closer and closer and closer to really the bones
[Guest]: of what I'm really saying or thinking. So it's not the same process for every academic
[Guest]: or sociologist or whatever. But for me, that's how I do arrive at, I arrive at myself. And
[Guest]: I arrive at theory through the act of writing.
[Amit Varma]: One of the great TIL moments I had in the show was when I was recording an episode with
[Amit Varma]: Chinmay Tumbe on his great book, India Moving, where he pointed out that the largest source
[Amit Varma]: of internal migration in India is women getting married, because women get married and they
[Amit Varma]: move to move with their husband wherever the husband is. And that's the largest source
[Amit Varma]: of internal migration in the country where you would imagine in your mind's eye, if you
[Amit Varma]: think of internal migration, it's like migrants from UP, Bihar, moving to Delhi or Bombay
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth. And what you're talking about here is also seems like a seismic shift
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that it is women migrating, but it is not for marriage, it is not following
[Amit Varma]: a husband. It is for job prospects. It's an incredibly empowering act. Like I did an episode
[Amit Varma]: with Shrena Bhattacharya on just these subjects. And she was speaking about how one of the
[Amit Varma]: possible reasons she gave a number of reasons for the decline of women in the workforce
[Amit Varma]: is that many of the booming industries are, you know, things like construction and all
[Amit Varma]: of that, where typically you have male laborers, right? Women won't migrate to work at a construction
[Amit Varma]: site alone unless they're going with a husband. And it seems that industries like these new
[Amit Varma]: industries like the modeling industry are an industry where, you know, women will come
[Amit Varma]: from one city to another on their own to look for opportunities there. And therefore, it
[Amit Varma]: is in almost a very opposite of what the earlier feminist criticism would have been with the
[Amit Varma]: earlier criticism would have been that women are being objectified and blah, blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: But actually, women are really being empowered in a sense by these new sort of opportunities
[Amit Varma]: that they have got. So was this sort of the kind of journey that you made as well? And
[Amit Varma]: you know, what was this sort of process like? What was it like talking to these young women
[Amit Varma]: and kind of were there light bulb moments in there as well for you?
[Guest]: Yeah, absolutely. For the first point, you know, this idea that marriage is the most
[Guest]: prominent migration stream. Actually, this line of thinking invisibilizes a lot of the
[Guest]: migration that has also happened for work, especially cross-border migration, right?
[Guest]: I mean, you have domestic workers, you know, from all over the world, you know, sort of
[Guest]: crisscrossing going here, there, everywhere. There have been women migrating for work for
[Guest]: decades. Even when women migrate with marriage, they migrate for work because they migrate
[Guest]: and then they go work. They are also migrant labor in on construction sites or wherever
[Guest]: they go, right? A lot of the time it is Jodi labor that's happening. So it is a couple
[Guest]: is contracted, but for wages of one person and a couple gets contracted. And this is
[Guest]: a common way of actually contracting labor. So, I mean, the absolutely migration for work
[Guest]: that women have been doing has been present. It has been invisibilized and it has not only
[Guest]: been for marriage. I, in my work, I found, so, you know, I'm talking about specifically
[Guest]: women in the modeling industry, but I found that there are things that I learned that
[Guest]: gave me that illuminated realities about women's working lives in general, right? So, for example,
[Guest]: one of the things and there are three things that I, and I've said it before, three things
[Guest]: that I realized were common to women's working lives, which is, and I'll say the three of
[Guest]: them and then I'll explain them. The invisibility of their labor, the condition, the conditionality
[Guest]: of their work and the cost. What I mean is that like women models, they assume to be
[Guest]: not really doing work. It's just wearing clothes and sashaying down and I'm like, well, where's
[Guest]: the labor in that, right? So let's check, but there is work as I've shown in my book.
[Guest]: It is, modeling is a form of labor. It is a form of informal work. It is gendered labor,
[Guest]: but it is assumed to be not really work or just women's work. Similarly, what women do
[Guest]: is always considered, is always invisibilized. Whether it is work in the home, when it's
[Guest]: paid work, it's more complicated, right? Because it's visible, but women try to stay invisible
[Guest]: because you don't want to, the premise of middle class respectability is seclusion of
[Guest]: women. So women who do need to go out and work, they're the ones who go out and work.
[Guest]: That's the understanding that we have in society, right? Not because it is empowering or it's
[Guest]: transformative or you want to do it or it's fulfilling, etc. Even when you are in paid
[Guest]: work, many women try to minimize that, even if they earn more than men, more than their
[Guest]: parents, they try. And because there is a sense that it's going to create an imbalance,
[Guest]: it will threaten their relationships. We don't have an imagination of a good relationship
[Guest]: where women are earning more than men or they are visibly in the public eye. I mean, even
[Guest]: we have films like Abhiman and there are ample cultural references where this is a source
[Guest]: of tension. So it's best to, it is either invisibilized or you try and manage the visibility.
[Guest]: You don't want to be too visible. The second thing, the conditionality. So models would
[Guest]: be told, okay, you can work by their parents, they would, okay, but you can't wear a bikini.
[Guest]: You can't do this kind of work. You can work until you get married. You can do modeling
[Guest]: until you get married off, etc. Similarly, women generally in paid work, they have conditions.
[Guest]: Finish housework and then go to work. Come home, make sure all care work is done. Right?
[Guest]: So you can work if you don't travel too much. You can't go on tours. You can't come home
[Guest]: too late. Everything is under this, within this framework of conditions. The third is
[Guest]: the cost. In the case of models, it's stigma. In the case of others, it can be, I mean,
[Guest]: you know, the relationships as we were talking about, stigma is always there. You leave the
[Guest]: house, the possibility of stigma is always there. So there is definitely a cost to being
[Guest]: part of the paid labor workforce. And I feel that these three define the experiences of
[Guest]: women in paid work, you know, and perhaps that's the reason also for such low female
[Guest]: workforce participation. You know, it is the other, I mean, I realized, for example, that
[Guest]: when I would, when I did a comparison between a woman who came from, say, an upper class
[Guest]: house and a young girl who came from a more lower middle class family, and both of them
[Guest]: were working with the same modeling agency. The woman who came from the upper class household,
[Guest]: she faced like a lowering of her status when she joined the modeling industry and she won.
[Guest]: She said, you know, do I have to just for 10,000 bucks, I have to do all this. So it's
[Guest]: like, you know, there is, it's not a fulfilling experience because of these reasons. On the
[Guest]: other hand, it is also a transformative experience, you know, for those who are in paid work and
[Guest]: so on. So it's not difficult to understand why there is reduced female workforce participation,
[Guest]: in a sense, even because I mean, there's no effort to actually create the conditions for
[Guest]: which women can imagine their lives as free to be ambitious, you know, or really dream
[Guest]: and want to be anything they want to be. There's so many hurdles in front of them.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, earlier when you were talking about your own process of finding the space and
[Amit Varma]: the time to write, the phrase you use two or three times is I gave myself permission.
[Amit Varma]: And is it then the case that, you know, the way you said it, it's as if it is unusual,
[Amit Varma]: it is a big step, it is a big leap, I gave myself permission. Is it then a ubiquitous
[Amit Varma]: problem that women don't give themselves permission enough?
[Guest]: Yes, I think so. I think even the best of us operate with very deeply ingrained ideas
[Guest]: of duty and, you know, a sense of responsibility towards our roles. And I think parenting is
[Guest]: one of those parenting, caregiving, those kinds of ones are very deeply ingrained. So
[Guest]: it is about giving yourself permission. It's also, I mean, it's not just in this scenario,
[Guest]: but even giving yourself permission to tell the truth, right? Giving yourself permission
[Guest]: to write personal things, to write about the violence you've experienced, to talk about
[Guest]: problems in your relationships, to write about parents, to write about your children, which
[Guest]: must be even more complicated. So, as writers also, we have to give ourselves, that's why
[Guest]: memoirs are so interesting, because how do you arrive at a place where you're actually
[Guest]: able to open the doors and really let yourself bleed on the page in that sense, you know,
[Guest]: which is why I admire Natasha Badwar so much, you know, because she's able to actually,
[Guest]: you know, open paths of herself to people, which is why I feel that people also respond
[Guest]: to her in a certain way. So that's, so there are different levels of permission and we
[Guest]: arrive again, we get there differently at our own pace, you know, and it's like being
[Guest]: able to, like I was saying, talking about violence that we've experienced. And I feel
[Guest]: like many women have arrived at that place of talking about violence or the Me Too, for
[Guest]: example, that took so long to happen, really. But even for men, their experiences of violence,
[Guest]: their experience of bullying, something, they have not, we have not arrived there, I feel.
[Guest]: And that's where I feel, for example, in this case of this young man in the cricket, you
[Guest]: know, there was recently that case of bullying and being hung from the 15th floor by one
[Guest]: of the IPL league teams many years back. But that kind of revelation, I think, should open
[Guest]: up a conversation on experiences of bullying and the kind of violence that we have not
[Guest]: heard about. And we should.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, as a cricket journalist, I can tell you that that kind of bullying was actually
[Amit Varma]: much more common back in the day, within the team. I think Irfan Pathan, for example, got
[Amit Varma]: bullied very badly like that. I won't take the names of the people who did it. There's
[Amit Varma]: no point to it now. But what happened to Yuzvindra Chahal, for example, is, you know, even before
[Amit Varma]: this, there was an incident where during a party, these people just for fun, they tied
[Amit Varma]: him up with a rope and they put a thing on his mouth and then they forgot. And he was
[Amit Varma]: like that all night and discovered by the cleaner the next day. And my, you know, default
[Amit Varma]: thought here would be that those people should, their career should be over. Whoever did this
[Amit Varma]: just on the spot over, right? There's not even something you want to discuss, you want
[Amit Varma]: to, but it doesn't happen. No, I mean, and going back to that thing of giving yourself
[Amit Varma]: permission, you know, I think that can be a light bulb moment for someone listening
[Amit Varma]: to this to realize that you can give yourself permission, not just in the sense of the word
[Amit Varma]: permission, that you're holding back from things because you don't have permission,
[Amit Varma]: but also from the point of view of agency, that you can give yourself permission, you
[Amit Varma]: know. And I think perhaps some of us who are more fortunate take it for granted that we
[Amit Varma]: are able to give ourselves permission, but that it's a conceptual leap that anyone can
[Amit Varma]: make at some level. We hold ourselves back too much. Let's now sort of come to Intimacy,
[Amit Varma]: that you've done Mannequin and you've, I think, looked at the people within that book, not
[Amit Varma]: just as, you know, subjects to whom you are applying a particular large sociological theory,
[Amit Varma]: but as actual real people you've spoken to, you've captured their voices, you've told
[Amit Varma]: their stories, and you've arrived at this very different understanding of them as people
[Amit Varma]: with free will and agency, and they're doing what they're doing, and a much better understanding
[Amit Varma]: of that. How did then that next step to Intimacy sort of come about? Like you mentioned that
[Amit Varma]: when you were coming up with a plan for a PhD thesis, you know, the scope of your original
[Amit Varma]: proposal included what is an Intimacy that you also look at. So what was it always on
[Amit Varma]: the cards that after Mannequin, this is like a natural progression or is it something that?
[Guest]: No, not at all. Actually, this was a completely different moment. And it was connected. So,
[Guest]: you know, I'm not in academia per se. So, I have, you know, I have a regular job, etc,
[Guest]: etc. I work in the development sector. So there is, I think I was at a time and place
[Guest]: where an opportunity arose to apply for this postdoctoral fellowship at the Tata Institute
[Guest]: of Social Sciences for something called the Urban Aspirations Project. And I think I had
[Guest]: just been, it had just been in my mind, this question of middle class women, and sex work,
[Guest]: you know, where were the voices of middle class women or middle class men as clients?
[Guest]: And what was the internet doing? You know, I had just finished a study called Erotics,
[Guest]: which was a multi country study. And we, myself and Maya Indira Ganesh, my colleague and friend,
[Guest]: we had done the bit on India. And we looked at how young women in Mumbai were using the
[Guest]: internet to explore their sexual rights to express themselves and to find information
[Guest]: on sexual health, and to really, you know, have relationships and so on. And this was
[Guest]: in 2000 and around then 9, 10, you know, that was the time period. So, I was interested
[Guest]: in the internet and sexuality rights. I had already been working on sex work, sex workers
[Guest]: rights movements, I consider myself an ally to the sex workers rights movements. So, I
[Guest]: had been working on this field. But I hadn't, but I had this question, like what, what about
[Guest]: middle class women? We talk a lot about choices and consent and the majburi of poor women
[Guest]: who are in sex work. But what about middle class women? What about escorts? What's happening
[Guest]: with the internet? So, with those questions in mind, I applied for the postdoc fellowship,
[Guest]: and I got it. And it was again, a year at TIS. It was in, it got me a room of my own
[Guest]: very far away, I had to travel, this is very far from where I stay. So, it was a stretch.
[Guest]: And it gave me access to journals of all kinds. And it gave me an ID, an email ID, through
[Guest]: which a TIS.edu email ID through which I could actually work from an institution. Institutions
[Guest]: are really important when you're doing work, sex, sex work research, because it gives you
[Guest]: a credibility, it gives you a sort of a safety net, actually, you know, you feel safer somehow
[Guest]: when you're working within an institutional framework, especially on something like sex
[Guest]: work. So, it was just an opportunity to answer a question that had been buzzing in my head.
[Guest]: And so I took the year to do that, to do the research to devise this research to carry
[Guest]: it out. And then, you know, as I sort of, when I finished Mannequin, I think I went
[Guest]: back to it. And I thought that, okay, no, this also needs to be out there, it needs
[Guest]: to be in some shape and form. And so then I, my publisher was already very keen on it.
[Guest]: Even before Mannequin, they were keen on this book. So, and so then I think I finished it
[Amit Varma]: during the pandemic. And had you already arrived at the way one
[Amit Varma]: thinks about this, like one of the things you've described in the book at great length
[Amit Varma]: and very eloquently is on the different feminist perspectives on sex work and the battles that
[Amit Varma]: have raged around it, like one perspective, obviously, is that it's basically coercion,
[Amit Varma]: it's a patriarchy, it's, you know, and therefore sex work just by default is wrong. And the
[Amit Varma]: other point of view is that no, it's like any other work, it's like selling shoes, like
[Amit Varma]: from that, you know, that earlier quote, and therefore, any work that is done with agency,
[Amit Varma]: you have to dignify it, you can't, you know, criminalize it, or you can't cast moral judgment
[Amit Varma]: on it. And these are sort of the different points of views. And there are all kinds of
[Amit Varma]: nuances in between, and so on and so forth. So what was your journey in terms of thinking
[Amit Varma]: about this? And how much of that was shaped by the actual interactions you had with, you
[Amit Varma]: know, other activists or sex workers themselves?
[Guest]: It's completely shaped by my interactions with both sex workers as well as other activists.
[Guest]: And it's emerged over time. So there are different positions, the positions have shifted. And,
[Guest]: and as I said, you know, there's nothing more important than actually hearing sex workers
[Guest]: themselves talk about the context of their lives. And in intimate city, you know, there
[Guest]: are some portions, which I would say are more recent. So, for example, there are some voices
[Guest]: of, you know, sex workers who have heard on podcasts, for example. And so they're much
[Guest]: more recent. And you're in or there are, you know, some voices who are on Twitter. So,
[Guest]: you know, one hears of their experiences firsthand from those sources. These are not Indian sex
[Guest]: workers, who are not on Twitter and on doing podcasts, etc. I wish there were, but there
[Guest]: aren't at the moment. And so they are informed by current voices that one hears as well as
[Guest]: those accumulated over the years.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and you also, I'll read out another passage from your book, where at one point
[Amit Varma]: you write, quote, this is a new landscape for feminists. Here the question of sexual
[Amit Varma]: commerce has moved beyond the old debate of whether it is work or violence. It is a livelihood
[Amit Varma]: and form of work and enterprise and business linked to global flows and local realities.
[Amit Varma]: It is a real and discursive space that is contested in which labor rights and human
[Amit Varma]: rights are sought. Solidarity is built even as violence and oppression is experienced.
[Amit Varma]: There is simultaneously a powerful rescue industry out there that dismisses these discursive
[Amit Varma]: advances, obsessed with containing the movement of adult women, believing it to be a form
[Amit Varma]: of protection for women's own good. Sex work has divided feminists like no other issue
[Amit Varma]: in India as much as elsewhere. And there have been many pages devoted to exploring the relationship
[Amit Varma]: between feminists and sex workers. This is because sex work gets at the heart of several
[Amit Varma]: important feminist areas of debate, agency, choice, consent, and bodily autonomy, stop
[Amit Varma]: quote. And are these debates some things that then rage even within the circles that you're
[Amit Varma]: part of, even within your fellow activists, where you discuss these things, like within
[Amit Varma]: these in-groups also, would there be different attitudes to the sex workers themselves? And
[Amit Varma]: I'm going to come to the law later because the attitude of the law is a whole different
[Amit Varma]: subject here. But, you know, within the movement itself, are these things that have to be sort
[Amit Varma]: of negotiated? And in your own case, what was your evolution like, you know, actually
[Amit Varma]: encountering sex workers, talking to them? In what ways did that increase your understanding
[Guest]: of what's going on there? Definitely, there is debate. I think it's hard to have one position
[Guest]: on any issue. But these issues in particular, sex work is a particularly divisive issue,
[Guest]: right? And in the initial years, I don't hear this as much anymore. But in the initial years,
[Guest]: people would ask even to each other that, are you saying you would allow your daughter
[Guest]: to do sex work, for example, you know, what would you, is that what you're saying, you
[Guest]: know, when you say that women can consent or do have a choice and to do sex work? And
[Guest]: actually, there's no answer to that, right? Like, how can you, that's, it's a conversation
[Guest]: stopper. I feel that because really would, I mean, it's such a foolish question to ask.
[Guest]: It's not like there are special courses in doing sex work at university, etc. Choices
[Guest]: are not made in a vacuum, right? As they are determined by caste, class, etc. So we would,
[Guest]: for example, not be, I mean, where is the choice to be a domestic worker or to do or
[Guest]: to, you know, there is a certain framework within which you make that choice, right?
[Guest]: You wouldn't be a car mechanic or a car salesman. I mean, it's not a, they're the result, they're
[Guest]: the outcomes of a certain caste, class, socio-economic background. And so these kind of questions
[Guest]: I feel are, they just prevent an understanding from evolving of why people do certain things
[Guest]: in life. And I've, I find that more and more there, you know, there is one of the questions,
[Guest]: for example, when Intimacy was being released, one of the questions that came to me and this
[Guest]: question has come up in other places as well. People asking me that, what would you recommend
[Guest]: to someone who wants to do sex work or who wants to be an escort? And I take this question
[Guest]: very seriously, because, and I answer with great seriousness, because I really feel that
[Guest]: if you want to do escort work, it's an, you know, if you feel that that is something that
[Guest]: you want to engage in, you must find a community, even if it is an online community, because
[Guest]: that's the way to be safe. To be a solitary worker is very vulnerable, puts you in a very
[Guest]: vulnerable spot. So I see it as a serious question of someone who is considering it.
[Guest]: And I find that there must be many, many young people who would have done some sort of sexual
[Guest]: service provision in the pandemic to make ends meet, etc. I feel it is the outcome of
[Guest]: precarity and it's not a career option or a vocation or something like that. But it
[Guest]: is a form of a transaction that just because we don't like it, perhaps, or it doesn't fit
[Guest]: into a certain moral framework we have grown up with, that we can remove the possibility
[Guest]: of it actually happening, whether it is to our children, whether it is to our family
[Guest]: members or to us. We cannot really never say never, you know, in that sense. So I mean,
[Guest]: some of these conversations are very rhetorical. They're not rooted in reality. I find this
[Guest]: also this idea of the shifts that you were talking about, that's important. So this idea
[Guest]: that sex work is work, right, that was very powerful in the 90s. And it is work, it is
[Guest]: labour, it does increase people's self-confidence. But so what, right? It's remained at the discursive
[Guest]: level. It hasn't resulted in better working conditions, etc, etc. That is achieved only
[Guest]: if the, I mean, it's related to the sector that actually if the sector improves the informal
[Guest]: sector within which sex work is located, if that is supported in some way, then perhaps
[Guest]: rights of sex workers are going to be similar to rights of other workers. Sex workers being
[Guest]: organised has been their most important strength. And actually that is what feminists have appreciated.
[Guest]: And that's something I write about. I ask that, is that why feminists are allies of
[Guest]: sex workers groups? You know, where is the solitary sex worker? Would we be supporting
[Guest]: solitary sex workers? It is really their mobilisation and their strength as a movement with a very
[Guest]: strong feminist politics that have created this alliance. And they support one another's
[Guest]: agendas for the most part. But there's the other shift, I think. Now, okay, sex workers
[Guest]: work now, we are also hearing about sex work as service provision, which is the term that
[Guest]: most of my, the interview is used, you know, we are service providers. Okay, now, we understand
[Guest]: that now, now the economy is a service economy. So this understanding of service provision
[Guest]: is sort of fits in very nicely with that. And it also, this is the new part that I realised
[Guest]: while thinking about it, that actually escorts perhaps are not the same as sex work as I
[Guest]: had understood it all along. Sex work, the escort, you know, these, the people I interviewed
[Guest]: kept saying that we're not standing under a lamppost. This is not sex work. You think
[Guest]: this is sex work? I don't think so. This is service provision. And I kept thinking, I
[Guest]: thought that, okay, no, they're actually just trying to distance themselves from the stigma.
[Guest]: But then I realised that no, actually, there is something a little different in what they're
[Guest]: doing. In fact, the difference is that they are part of the gig economy, you know. So
[Guest]: escort service provision, that kind of transactional sex, we can say is part of the gig economy,
[Guest]: which is different from the informal economy in which traditional sex work is located.
[Guest]: Again the question, so what, right? So what if escort service is part of the gig economy?
[Guest]: And that's a question that I struggle with. Yes, it can also lead to a different self-perception.
[Guest]: You can call yourself a gig economy worker, you can align yourself with several demands.
[Guest]: But can you organise? Will you be able to organise, which is so central to collective
[Guest]: bargaining? Is it going to draw attention to the precarious lives that people in the
[Guest]: gig economy are leading? You know, the precarious wider economic context within which the gig
[Guest]: economy has emerged? So these kind of questions do arise for me. And these are the kind of
[Guest]: shifts that are happening while I'm writing and while I'm listening to the voices that
[Guest]: my interviewees are bringing. The third thing that I really wanted to talk about is this
[Guest]: thing you said about, you know, trafficking and prostitution, right? What is the shift
[Guest]: that really is important for me? And for me, it is really, I mean, initially one saw that
[Guest]: trafficking is equal to prostitution, even in our laws, they are equated and made the
[Guest]: same, which means that there is a belief that every single woman in sex work has been trafficked
[Guest]: and she needs to be rescued, rehabilitated and sent back home. And there's a saying,
[Guest]: which goes, save us from the saviours, which is what the sex workers movement says, which
[Guest]: is that basically this assumption is false, that all of us want to be rescued and taken
[Guest]: away. Many women arrive there because of violence, because of trafficking and trafficking is
[Guest]: a reality. There is definitely a concern there. All prostitution is not trafficking. All women
[Guest]: in sex work have not been trafficked. Women have the ability to consent and be there.
[Guest]: These are adult women for the most part. But adult women are not given agency, which was
[Guest]: saying there is this assumption that adult women cannot be trusted on their own. And
[Guest]: I saw that in the courts and the kind of judgments that courts gave when there were raids and
[Guest]: women, even women who had been brought by families, by husbands and so on, the court
[Guest]: mandated that they be returned to those very families, those very husbands, because it's
[Guest]: like they don't believe that it is possible for a woman to be outside the family system
[Guest]: or the courts. So if a woman vehemently says, you know, I'm not going to go back, then they
[Guest]: will put her in a shelter home and they will keep her until she signs, until a guardian
[Guest]: comes and sort of releases. And these are adult women. So I mean, I have seen the harm
[Guest]: that this blanket trafficking architecture of laws and this belief that every this conflation
[Guest]: of trafficking and prostitution has done. And so I find it, I find that position to
[Guest]: be extremely problematic. This idea that women cannot consent to practicing sex work.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, in fact, you know, you write early in your book, quote, the bogey of trafficking
[Amit Varma]: has resulted in several hardcore anti-trafficking laws and task forces that have been critiqued
[Amit Varma]: as essentially ploys to push back against migration, especially of women, and pursue
[Amit Varma]: abolitionist motives that in practice infringe on human rights. And you give a demonstration
[Amit Varma]: of this in this great chapter where you talk about raids and rescues, often involving savior
[Amit Varma]: NGO members, as you put it. And in that you write, several organizations reported that
[Amit Varma]: the police use violence during these raids, arbitrarily detained women found in the raid
[Amit Varma]: locations, mistook children of prostitutes for minors in prostitution and took them away
[Amit Varma]: and continued the raid, even in the absence of minors or cross border girls. In fact,
[Amit Varma]: raids became part of everyday life in the red light area, a terrible occupational hazard,
[Amit Varma]: which left many of the girls in police lockups for a day or two in court for another, and
[Amit Varma]: then back to work as usual, once someone came to bail them out or once assigned an undertaking
[Amit Varma]: or paid the local police to let them go. And there's a TIL here which is similar to a TIL
[Amit Varma]: Rukmini gave me in my episode with her, where Rukmini pointed out that many of these so
[Amit Varma]: called rape cases that are filed are actually, you know, where the boy has run away with
[Amit Varma]: the girl and the family is against it for caste reasons or whatever reasons and they
[Amit Varma]: file a case. And actually it is a family that is a problem. It is not the boy or the girl.
[Amit Varma]: And similarly, the TIL that I got from here is that when there are cases of actual coercion
[Amit Varma]: putting you know, throwing women into prostitution, it is not from so called criminal networks
[Amit Varma]: or gangs. It is from the family themselves, from the parents or the husband or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: So this whole notion that we rescue a woman and we send her back to the family is compounding
[Amit Varma]: the crime in a massive way, doesn't help the women. And what you point out that adult women
[Amit Varma]: being forced to stay in shelter homes until a guardian comes and signs, that's equal to
[Amit Varma]: abduction, imprisonment, whatever you call it. It's just, you know, it's incredibly horrifying.
[Amit Varma]: So that was sort of one of the TILs I got out of this. And I'm just thinking aloud here
[Amit Varma]: of morality, you know, when it comes to ethics, there are a number of questions which are
[Amit Varma]: known as icky questions, icky thought experiments, which I'm sure you must have heard of, like
[Amit Varma]: for example, here's a thought experiment. There's a man, he's going to eat a chicken.
[Amit Varma]: So he kills a chicken, and he's going to cut it up and cook it for dinner. But before that,
[Amit Varma]: he has sex with the chicken. Is it morally wrong or right? And most people will intuitively
[Amit Varma]: say that of course it is wrong. But if you try to rationally explain why it is wrong,
[Amit Varma]: if it's okay to kill the chicken, okay to cut it up and eat it, why not do whatever
[Amit Varma]: he's doing? There's no answer to that. Another category of icky problem is that, let us say
[Amit Varma]: that there is a brother and a sister and they're both adults. And they don't want to have kids,
[Amit Varma]: but they want to have sex with each other. Is it right or wrong? And again, the instinctive
[Amit Varma]: response is to say, of course it is wrong. But if you are rationally asked to justify
[Amit Varma]: it, you know, it's very difficult to do so. And I think this whole stigmatization of sex
[Amit Varma]: work seems to fall in that category that there is this instinctive repulsion to the thought,
[Amit Varma]: maybe it's an instinct that we've evolved to have for whatever reasons. But, you know,
[Amit Varma]: rationally, I think it is really impossible to explain why sex work should be wrong. Like
[Amit Varma]: even what you pointed out about escort saying that, hey, but we are not sex workers. And
[Amit Varma]: I think even that is kind of unjustified. They're looking down on sex workers. Why?
[Amit Varma]: Why would you need to say that we are not them? There's nothing wrong with them in that
[Amit Varma]: sense. So I'm just sorry, I'm just thinking aloud. And what are your sort of thoughts
[Amit Varma]: on the morality of this? Because obviously, the obvious reason for why sex workers are
[Amit Varma]: looked down on is because men want to control women's sexuality, because it is a threat
[Amit Varma]: to them. What are your thoughts on, you know, just our social outlook on this?
[Guest]: Yeah, the moral framework is. So it's the same moral framework that says that, you know,
[Guest]: men should not wear certain kinds of clothes or, you know, it's the, as you said, the,
[Guest]: you know, the aim is to control women's sexuality or find it threatening, etc, etc. It's on
[Guest]: that continuum, this moral framework. And in fact, in Mannequin, I have a device called
[Guest]: a stigmometer that I use to, which is like basically put, you know, the nun at one end
[Guest]: and the sex worker at the other, and then see the various levels of stigma that are
[Guest]: related to actually sexuality. So stigma and sexuality being related completely. I find
[Guest]: that in reality, so this is a narrative, right, that society has. But within that narrative,
[Guest]: there are nuances. And within that narrative, there are humanizing of those experiences.
[Guest]: So all our films, all our literature, we have the humane sex worker with the heart of gold,
[Guest]: who sacrifices for the hero or whatever, you know. So we have enough depictions around
[Guest]: us to actually humanize and make it possible to have empathy and to accommodate different
[Guest]: kinds of moralities, understanding the circumstances and contexts where people are coming from.
[Guest]: So in the reality, I mean, so this is the broader narrative. But then when you go into
[Guest]: the real stories of people, these hardcore positions are not there, I find, you know.
[Guest]: So there is, you know, those who, this gentleman who is a service provider and he said, you
[Guest]: know, when I entered, when I started, I never thought that I would find such nice people,
[Guest]: you know, this gentleman in one of my interviews said to me. And I thought that was such a
[Guest]: nice reflection from him that, you know, he was really being honest and saying that, look,
[Guest]: I never thought that there'll be such nice people who will be doing transactional sex.
[Guest]: So when it comes to real people, then these narratives don't really apply. And that's
[Guest]: our only hope, actually, that one person at a time and in all the interviews, you'll find
[Guest]: that these are the transactions that take place are driven by fantasy, by desire, by
[Guest]: an appreciation of, by giving themselves permission to do something that society does not really
[Guest]: allow them to do, whether it is they're seeking loneliness, they're seeking friendships. Sometimes
[Guest]: it's a financial decision, they're seeking money, they're seeking travel companions,
[Guest]: you know, it's not always the transactions are not always in cash. There are travels,
[Guest]: there are like, you know, people paying for each other's tickets, there is networks, which
[Guest]: in Bombay for people who come to Bombay, it's very important to have networks, friendships
[Guest]: that are sort of no, no strings attached. And they are a place where you can see, you
[Guest]: can discover your sexuality, explore your sexuality and discover yourself a third domain,
[Guest]: you know, which is the personal, which Paramita Vohra actually, she talks about the private,
[Guest]: the public and the personal, which is separate from the private and the public. And if I
[Guest]: take that a little further, then, you know, we all have public personas, we have our private,
[Guest]: which is our private selves. But even that private self is performing a social persona,
[Guest]: right? So we are in marriages, we have children, we have relationships, we have families and
[Guest]: so on and so forth. And there's a third domain, which is what our fantasies, our desires,
[Guest]: what we what we want for ourselves, you know, and that's the space. That's the third axis,
[Guest]: I think, that a lot of my interviewees, I feel place their seeking or providing sexual
[Guest]: services in, you know, trying to fulfil the fantasies and their desires. And this is a,
[Guest]: this one here, one has heard of in, in discourses around men who have sex with men, MSM, which
[Guest]: is a category, you know, which in HIV AIDS sort of parlance. And here we have men who
[Guest]: don't identify as gay. And they have their lives, their social personas as married men,
[Guest]: heterosexual men living, you know, regular straight lives. But they also have sex with
[Guest]: men, which is that their personal domain. And then it doesn't contradict each other.
[Guest]: Their identity is, as MSM does not contradict their identity as householder, you know, so
[Guest]: it's a, yeah, I think my big headline point is that when it comes to macro individual
[Guest]: lives, these narratives don't necessarily work.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I love that point. And, you know, one thought that I've, that first struck me
[Amit Varma]: when I did an episode with Anshul Malhotra, who had written that book on partition and
[Amit Varma]: she's out with a new one now, but I'm referring to the older one where she had sort of interviewed
[Amit Varma]: people who'd carried objects with them. But as an aside, she spoke about how one of the
[Amit Varma]: stories that a person told, a Hindu who had come from Pakistan, if I remember correctly,
[Amit Varma]: perhaps from Baluchistan, was that every day before partition, these people would gather
[Amit Varma]: in the village square and they were all friends and they were all a community and they were
[Amit Varma]: all good with each other and so on and so forth. And they would listen to the radio.
[Amit Varma]: And as more and more news came of the impending partition and of the horrors being committed,
[Amit Varma]: they began to treat each other sort of differently. And there were two forces playing out and
[Amit Varma]: one is the concrete that you see these people around you in the flesh and blood. And the
[Amit Varma]: other is the power of the abstract idea. In this case, the dangerous, toxic one of that
[Amit Varma]: particular kind of nationalism. And another illustration Anshul gave of this was, though
[Amit Varma]: the formulation is sort of something that I came up with. So she didn't put it in this
[Amit Varma]: way. But it was interesting that she was interviewing a couple in Pakistan about their journey that
[Amit Varma]: they had made from India. And they were ranting against Hindus. And after a while, one of
[Amit Varma]: them realized she's Hindu. And he said, bete aap aise nahi ho, aap theek ho. You know,
[Amit Varma]: so in the concrete, it's okay. But in the abstract, it's a problem. And this is something
[Amit Varma]: I think about a bit that a lot of India's problems are because of dangerous abstract
[Amit Varma]: notions like nationalism, or tradition, or religious purity, or whatever the case might
[Amit Varma]: be, which drive us away from each other. But in the concrete, very often, when we come
[Amit Varma]: across the other, we are perfectly happy to be good with them to be friendly with them.
[Amit Varma]: Like so often, it's so common to find a Hindu bigot say something like, but I have Muslim
[Amit Varma]: friends. And, you know, just illustrating that. So what you spoke about, you know, that
[Amit Varma]: these notions might be there that it is immoral, or it is corrupting our culture. But if you
[Amit Varma]: actually, you know, if you concretize it, in a sense, you know, you'd get a different
[Amit Varma]: notion of it. If you come across these people in the flesh and realize that here, they just,
[Amit Varma]: you know, it's no different from someone selling a shoe as you put it elsewhere. And just thinking
[Amit Varma]: aloud, I'm also wondering, you mentioned transactions. And I'm just wondering that if all relationships
[Amit Varma]: are transactional in some way or the other. And the problem people have with sex work
[Amit Varma]: is that it commits a vulgarity of making this overt. You're revealing to people a part of
[Amit Varma]: themselves and a part of human nature that they would rather elide over and gloss over
[Amit Varma]: with some kind of covering. So that's, I mean, I'm just thinking aloud. What are your thoughts
[Guest]: on that? Yeah, I think that's a good observation. And I think I allude to it when I talk about
[Guest]: the comparison with the housewife, the labor that housewives do. And you know, a lot of
[Guest]: attention that's been given to unpaid care work, etc. But not so much to the sexual labor
[Guest]: that housewives are expected to perform. And it's an unpopular thing to say honestly, right?
[Guest]: It's not nice to say that lovemaking within marriage can be a chore. You know, you don't
[Guest]: want to say that because marriage is also wanted as something that is, it's idealized
[Guest]: and it's idolized. And critiquing marriage is dangerous also because it challenges, it
[Guest]: shows a mirror to ourselves. I think that's the danger. It's really we're putting a mirror
[Guest]: up to ourselves and our relationships. And then we are forced to really think of our
[Guest]: relationships in those terms. But it is also if we think with the scholarship, with the
[Guest]: lens of scholarship, then it is an extension of the labor. If we are thinking of paid labor,
[Guest]: etc. as you know, as household labor being, you know, chores, then all kinds of work that
[Guest]: can be contracted out. We see it as, it can be labor, right? In terms of scholarship.
[Guest]: The girlfriend experience, which is what, you know, Elizabeth Bernstein, who's a scholar,
[Guest]: what she calls the girlfriend experience that has revealed more explicitly how scripts of
[Guest]: transactional sex are mimicking romantic relationships. You know, that has, I think, brought these
[Guest]: ideas out even more that the girl, you can buy the girlfriend experience, which means
[Guest]: that everything is for sale. I think there's, it's also to do with the broader commodification
[Guest]: of everything in the current economic framework, right? There is a sense that everything can
[Guest]: be, has a monetary value attached to it. And so in that context, it doesn't seem much of
[Guest]: a stretch to think of everything in those terms. The harm that it causes to not think
[Guest]: of it in these terms is that, you know, then it becomes a duty, right? Then what we were
[Guest]: talking about at the beginning, this idea of marital duties, then becomes solidified,
[Guest]: right? Then it becomes like, it's a duty rather than labor. Also, what do you do with that
[Guest]: insight? Honestly, you know, what, how is it going to help our relationships or is it
[Guest]: going to, what's the point of coming up with this point? Is something that I would ask
[Guest]: myself, even though I've come up with a point, I'm like now, okay, now what do I do with
[Guest]: this? And maybe it will take me some time. I cannot answer you right now, but it'll take
[Guest]: me some time to really think about it and understand that will this enable people to
[Guest]: have more respect, say for the escort or for the sex worker? Will they be able to associate
[Guest]: themselves? Will they be able to then have some empathy? Will it open some bridge between
[Guest]: each person and a sex worker when they realize that, okay, this is not so far from my life
[Guest]: at all. It's not something that happens in red light areas in Kamathipura or Sonagachi,
[Guest]: but you know, there is a nuance here that is applicable to relations between partners
[Guest]: everywhere that transactional sex happens, not just in those areas, but you know, there
[Guest]: is something like transactional sex that is happening and we should start speaking about
[Guest]: it so that we really open up the contours, the inequality that maybe it's an opportunity
[Guest]: to actually have more equal conversations, equal relationships, talk about consent, talk
[Guest]: about better relations.
[Amit Varma]: You know, the part of your book that I was really struck by and you mentioned fantasies
[Amit Varma]: is this excellent passage where you speak about, in your chapter called the cruisers,
[Amit Varma]: about this guy called Vijay, where you write, quote, Vijay's best experience was when he
[Amit Varma]: was asked to play out the fantasy of a woman who responded to his ad around the mythical
[Amit Varma]: romantic first night after marriage or the suhaag raat in which they dressed up as groom
[Amit Varma]: and bride. We went out of town. This is him talking now. We went out of town. She wore
[Amit Varma]: a red saree. The bed was decorated like that with flowers and all. I wore a kurta pajama.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote. And I found this both charming, interesting, poignant, a whole bunch of things.
[Amit Varma]: Even the girlfriend experience is an acting out of that kind of fantasy. In a separate
[Amit Varma]: place, you've spoken about how escorts advertise themselves and how the two or three lines
[Amit Varma]: they'll write about themselves will have both the whore and the Madonna included, you know,
[Amit Varma]: both sides of that. And it just struck me that there is actually a deep kind of honesty
[Amit Varma]: to this, where both people know exactly what the other wants from them. And that is a deep
[Amit Varma]: kind of honesty, perhaps absent in most relationships. Again, I'm not insisting that all relationships
[Amit Varma]: are necessarily transactional. But at one level, it might well be the case and is worth
[Amit Varma]: thinking about whether only we exist for ourselves. And everyone else is a character in a play
[Amit Varma]: or a prop in a play. And we are the central character and we are everything. But we are
[Amit Varma]: always sort of in denial of this. And in every relationship, therefore, two people are never
[Amit Varma]: completely honest with each other about what they may want or what they may expect, except
[Amit Varma]: in the most healthy relationships, obviously. And conventional forms of relationships like
[Amit Varma]: marriages, for example, get in the way of these honest, this kind of honesty, where,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you kind of live a life of denial of all your life. So in that sense, in a sort
[Amit Varma]: of a relationship between an escort or a cruiser and their client or whatever, there is that
[Amit Varma]: sense that there is no facade, as it were, that this is the most honest kind of relationship
[Amit Varma]: that you can find. And therefore, that is something almost to be admired rather than
[Amit Varma]: looked down upon. And again, I'm totally thinking aloud, but just throwing these thoughts out
[Guest]: there for you. In the example that you offered, it should be clear that this was a male service
[Guest]: provider and the client was a woman. Exactly. And this is a really new and interesting finding,
[Guest]: you know, that there are women who are paying for certain kinds of services. It's also interesting.
[Guest]: I also love that example, that her fantasy was to have a Suhagrath as a single woman.
[Guest]: She wanted to experience a Suhagrath, which shows how deeply culturally coded our desires
[Guest]: are and how we imagine romance to be in a certain way. So I love that example, too.
[Guest]: I find that it is honest, but it is also secret. So then how do you reconcile these two things?
[Amit Varma]: Have you read this book called Everybody Lies, Big Data, New Data and What the Internet Can
[Amit Varma]: Tell Us About Who We Really Are by Seth Stevens-Davidowitz? So it's a book where this researcher basically
[Amit Varma]: got access to a whole bunch of data from Google and several others about what people are searching
[Amit Varma]: for. And his premise, and I agree with it completely, and it's a brilliant thought,
[Amit Varma]: is that people are most themselves when they think no one is looking. And when you're searching
[Amit Varma]: for something on Google, perhaps in an incognito window, you think no one is looking and therefore
[Amit Varma]: you are most yourself. And the searches are very revealing. Like the most bizarre thing
[Amit Varma]: about India, for example, is that India and Bangladesh, and in particular India, more
[Amit Varma]: than any other country in the world, adult males have this breastfeeding fantasy, which
[Amit Varma]: is like completely out of whack and insane. And there are a ton of sort of other insights
[Amit Varma]: like this about what people are really like. And you know, even in the context of fantasies,
[Amit Varma]: for example, I was reading what you had written about it and I recognized that there are certain
[Amit Varma]: categories in just what you describe and what the people you speak to chat with you about.
[Amit Varma]: There are categories. If you look at erotic fiction, for example, on sites like Late Erotica
[Amit Varma]: or if you look at the categories of porn there, for example, there's the cuckolding fantasy
[Amit Varma]: where, you know, this male escort goes to a couple and while the husband watches TV,
[Amit Varma]: he has sex with the wife and after that he's worried about whether she really wanted it.
[Amit Varma]: And he asked, so was it good for you? And she says, yeah, kind of, but he's happy. So,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and this is a whole category of erotic story out there. And, you know, and
[Amit Varma]: the other categories of, and I don't know how they would play out in this kind of context,
[Amit Varma]: but one in this kind of context, but one huge category out there, which according to Stephens
[Amit Varma]: Davidowitz is actually, you know, more popular with women than with men is non-consent. Right.
[Amit Varma]: And that completely blew me away because I know the category exists, both in terms of
[Amit Varma]: stories and videos and all of that. But the fact that more women would be searching for
[Amit Varma]: that category than men also blew me away and so on and so forth. So it's just interesting
[Amit Varma]: how, you know, in modern times, people can actually play out on their fantasies first
[Amit Varma]: by getting material on it. Like in 1990, if you have some random fantasy, you're not going
[Amit Varma]: to be, there's no internet, you have absolutely no access, you don't get to explore it, you
[Amit Varma]: don't get to go deeper. Here, number one, at one level, you get to go deeper in terms
[Amit Varma]: of searching for it, finding stories and videos on it, and realizing with a shock that there
[Amit Varma]: are millions of people like you who might have whatever specific fetish that you do.
[Amit Varma]: And at another level, which I discovered, which I read about in your book, is that you
[Amit Varma]: can also act out on these fantasies. And it's also very sad at one level, like at another
[Amit Varma]: place you have sex workers talking about quote unquote, the game of love, where they say
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, they keep coming back because they think we love them. And that's also so
[Amit Varma]: kind of poignant and tragic at a human level that I just think that there's kind of so
[Amit Varma]: much going on here. So what was it like for you to speak to all of these people and have
[Amit Varma]: those TILs in real time in the first person as they, you know, talk about all of this
[Amit Varma]: to you? You know, what was that experience like? And what are the other TILs that you
[Amit Varma]: have, which you, you know, I may not have noticed or may not be in the book?
[Guest]: I will paraphrase the gentleman who I interviewed that I didn't think they'd be such nice people.
[Guest]: But yeah, they were all, I think I, you know, the locations where I met many of the men
[Guest]: I interviewed was interesting. So there were some in BKC, and they came in corporate blues.
[Guest]: And, you know, there were some in, you know, coffee shops, there were, you know, men who
[Guest]: worked in say, you know, shops, etc, who I would meet at maybe say, a McDonald's next
[Guest]: to a station, you know, some places like that, young college, just out of college, maybe
[Guest]: working boys, there would be these are the people I met, and there would be those who
[Guest]: I had email interviews with. So there were really a range, a range of men, I wish I had
[Guest]: been able to interview more women escorts, it was a really hard experience getting access
[Guest]: to women escorts for various reasons. And I think I detailed that in the book. But,
[Guest]: you know, the interview that I did do with a very long interview over two days, which
[Guest]: was also a really wonderful experience. And it sort of showed me, you know, like she would
[Guest]: take a break to have lunch with her mother, I would take a break to have lunch with my
[Guest]: kids. And just the whole domestic domesticity of life was always interwoven with the conversations
[Guest]: we were having, which were very explicit, and quite challenging also, you know, whereas,
[Guest]: where she would also say things to provoke and challenge me. I would also be a bit disturbed
[Guest]: by her casual acceptance that rape happens in our work lives, it's occupational hazard.
[Guest]: And you know, we, the best thing to do is to calm a man down and continue, because nobody's
[Guest]: no policeman is going to believe me if I, if I call them, and it's just going to threaten
[Guest]: my life. So better to actually just handle it and move on. And so there were, I think,
[Guest]: a range of, of sort of experiences that I had. I think sex work research is, is already
[Guest]: a little difficult, because it's, it's what we call shadow research, right? It's difficult
[Guest]: to access both sex workers as well as clients. And the, because of I mean, for sex workers,
[Guest]: it's usually because of what we what I say are the three axes of their marginalization,
[Guest]: which is the illegality of their work or the perceived illegality of their work, the informality
[Guest]: of the labor, which makes it difficult to actually find them because informal work is
[Guest]: always in a flow. And the third is the morality. So these three axes are sort of this is the
[Guest]: triangle within which you do sex work research. And so it is hard to do sex work research.
[Guest]: There's also other things like how can you expect people to talk about their lives if
[Guest]: you yourself don't open yourself up and make yourself vulnerable also to thinking about
[Guest]: these things and to sharing parts of your life also. So there's always a moment where
[Guest]: you ask, do you want to ask me any questions? And they ask you a lot of questions about
[Guest]: your life. And there is an exchange that really makes it possible for us to arrive at a place
[Guest]: of comfort and an equal level of vulnerability, you know, that both of us have then. So these
[Guest]: are things you learn over time. So that's not that you learn, you know, you learn how
[Guest]: to handle tensions, how to handle questions, how to make people feel at ease. And you know
[Guest]: that really well, you're an interviewer yourself and your interviews are so personal. So there
[Guest]: is a process to arrive there. I think in this case, I had I built on several years of experience
[Guest]: and I was also much older. So I have done interviews with clients in my 20s. And at
[Guest]: that time, I, you know, the strategy was that go with an older woman, as a younger woman,
[Guest]: go with an older woman. And but this, I mean, so many years later as an older woman, I felt
[Guest]: I could sort of go into these on my own. There's also often, you know, a sexual tension, right?
[Guest]: Because it's like there, they will think that you or you imagine that maybe they're looking
[Guest]: at you in a sexualized manner, which may be so, but you know what, where does that not
[Guest]: happen, honestly. So those are little hurdles you get, which are related to doing research
[Guest]: on sexuality. And you learn over time.
[Amit Varma]: You know, we discussed about how there are feminist debates on it. And, you know, that
[Amit Varma]: debate is progressing in different directions. But the law seems to sort of look at prostitution
[Amit Varma]: always in the worst possible ways. You know, we've spoken about the bogey of trafficking
[Amit Varma]: as you eloquently put it and, you know, the result of criminalizing prostitution and I've
[Amit Varma]: in fact written before about how we should decriminalize victimless crimes of which sex
[Amit Varma]: work certainly is one. And you've written in your book, and I'll read this passage out.
[Amit Varma]: Priscilla Pyatt and Deborah Ward's study in Australia looks at violence against sex workers
[Amit Varma]: in different locations and the risks they face from a public health perspective. They
[Amit Varma]: find that a legal brothel provides the safest environment for sex workers and that an organized
[Amit Varma]: sex industry worker has a positive attitude to their work and workplace and reports consistent
[Amit Varma]: condom use. The main risks identified by the study are client violence and client resistance
[Amit Varma]: to condom use. For some, the problems associated with homelessness, drug use and extreme social
[Amit Varma]: isolation far outweighed the risks associated with sex work, stop quote. And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: and in India, especially, you've spoken at described at length in this book, how police
[Amit Varma]: will typically treat sex workers as quote, either victims or criminals. So just in terms
[Amit Varma]: of, you know, the law always is one step behind society in this sense, right? So even if social
[Amit Varma]: attitudes are gradually changing, and I'm not sure they're anywhere close to where there
[Amit Varma]: should be, I think those stigmas attached to sex workers are still there. But the law
[Amit Varma]: is a step further behind in this particular case. How much of an impediment is that to
[Amit Varma]: actually getting things to change on the ground? Like you describe this raid on the Simplex
[Amit Varma]: mansion, for example, where, you know, the cops raided this place, arrested everyone,
[Amit Varma]: including alleged customers. And then they went to the police station and they made these
[Amit Varma]: alleged customers, many of them stripped to their underwear, which reminded me of this
[Amit Varma]: recent incident that happened with journalists, if you read about that a couple of days ago,
[Amit Varma]: where these journalists had gone to the police station to protest against an activist's arrest,
[Amit Varma]: and they were all taken and stripped to their underwear, and the photo was made viral on
[Amit Varma]: social media, which is again, an illustration of how the state treats us as subjects and
[Amit Varma]: not citizens. You know, in terms of what the police is like, we're really not even forget
[Amit Varma]: 20th century, we're in the 19th century, you know, 19th century, we are following the spirit
[Amit Varma]: of the first penal code that the British set for us. It's just outrageous. So what's kind
[Amit Varma]: of your thought on that? Because it is not just society and social attitudes towards
[Amit Varma]: sex workers. It's a law and this law is often a greater danger to them than the alleged
[Amit Varma]: criminal gangs who, you know, might be involved.
[Guest]: Honestly, I feel a little empathetic towards the police. I mean, I and Bishakha went to
[Guest]: do a little fact finding mission of our own when we read about the Simplex raid in October
[Guest]: 2011 or 2012 that took place. And Simplex building is this huge building, it was known
[Guest]: as a brothel near Lamington Road and sort of the edge of Kamathipura. And overnight
[Guest]: 400 women were removed from that building. So that building was essentially hallowed
[Guest]: and it was clearly the, I mean, there's some real estate, there's some conspiracy there,
[Guest]: which led to this decision to raid that building and hollow it out completely. And when we
[Guest]: went to actually visit the police and ask about the raid, the inspector talked about
[Guest]: how, you know, for three days they were, he didn't sleep for three days. He was working
[Guest]: nonstop for three days. He himself did not really know where the order had come from.
[Guest]: You know, he was carrying out orders and they were, they came with media and the police
[Guest]: came with media. It was, they didn't have enough cars to take the girls. So there would
[Guest]: be one batch going and depositing girls in this police station. Then there would be,
[Guest]: the car would come back, vans would be sent to carry girls to another police station.
[Guest]: So it was like a, it was a massive operation, which they were ill-equipped to carry out
[Guest]: actually. And they were exhausted by the end of it. And it was, I mean, if you ask them,
[Guest]: why did you do it? They say, what's wrong is wrong. You know, that's their classic answer.
[Guest]: But you know, they also did not have much agency in that sense. Yes, that stripping
[Guest]: and, you know, stripping them to their underwear, etc. I mean, at local level, police have practices
[Guest]: which are, you know, a form of just violence, right? And that's there everywhere. So I feel
[Guest]: that that is very much, we have to account for those kinds of practices. Those are dependent
[Guest]: on broader police reforms, really trying and understanding what is the role of police in
[Guest]: society? You know, is it to do this kind of stuff? Is it, can there be a more productive
[Guest]: way of policing? Right? There are those kinds of things we need to have debates about in
[Guest]: our country. So it's not only specific to the issue of sex work. What is specific, I
[Guest]: think, is this what you'd mentioned decriminalizing versus legalizing, which is a question that
[Guest]: comes up often, you know, should prostitution be legalized? And people ask me that and I,
[Guest]: and sex workers themselves feel that they don't want sex work to be legalized, because
[Guest]: all that means is more surveillance by the state, you know, licenses and this and that.
[Guest]: So that's not what they want. But decriminalization is very important. Because if sex work is
[Guest]: decriminalized, then they can, so we have an ambiguous law where soliciting is criminalized,
[Guest]: sex work per se, there's no opinion on it, because it is conflated with trafficking.
[Guest]: Generally, it's not acknowledged that there are sex workers per se in law, in practice,
[Guest]: of course, police know and you know, I mean, there are arrangements there are even during
[Guest]: the pandemic, we had police stations offering relief to sex workers groups and so on. We
[Guest]: saw that in several places at the ground level, things work in a different way. But decriminalizing
[Guest]: sex work clearly would mean that sex workers can approach the police as citizens, when
[Guest]: they when they experience violence, extortion, and so on. And they have a right to actually
[Guest]: demand justice. And it would be the same for, for example, I spoke to you about the question
[Guest]: of the escort who said that why, I mean, you know, I can't say anything, I can't do anything
[Guest]: if some if a client rapes me. So it gives her the at least some leverage to approach
[Guest]: a police and say that, look, I'm being violated against so. So that's the value of decriminalizing
[Guest]: and it's actually a real need I feel so decriminalization I would be completely for. I feel that this
[Guest]: idea of citizenship is very important. You know, because then we have to account for
[Guest]: sex workers opinions or their preferences in several other domains, like for example,
[Guest]: what is a safe city? You know, they should be what what is what can education for their
[Guest]: children look like? I mean, there are so many areas where, you know, their citizenship is
[Guest]: being not sort of met, their entitlements are not being met. There's one more thing
[Guest]: I wanted to add about the comment you made about searches, you know, and what people
[Guest]: search for and whether that's really who they are. I don't think it's as simple as that.
[Guest]: And I'm thinking now about, you know, England in the late 90s, 2000s, when there was this
[Guest]: whole how about pedophilia, you know, and there was this concern that the internet was
[Guest]: corrupting people and you know, the internet was filled with pedophilics. And there would
[Guest]: be men who would get arrested for searching for certain things, right? But that's the
[Guest]: thing. If this if you're searching for something, it doesn't mean you've done it. So can you
[Guest]: go and arrest someone or say that someone is, you know, is a pedophile, if they have
[Guest]: searched for something, or if it is a fantasy, you know, there is a difference between fantasy
[Guest]: and reality. And whether it is law, whether it is one another, we have to realize that
[Guest]: there is a boundary there, you know, so to fantasize or to think of something, then you'll
[Guest]: arrest anything you think of, then you know, you can you can't think of anything, you know,
[Guest]: which is illegitimate or, you know, illegal. I absolutely agree. In fact, the sense in
[Amit Varma]: which said Davidowitz was talking about all of these searches is more in a descriptive
[Amit Varma]: way and not in a prescriptive or prescriptive way. So it's not that if somebody is fantasizing
[Amit Varma]: about something, it is okay to therefore do that, or that person is going to go out and
[Amit Varma]: do that, or that person even wants to do that. That's not the case at all. It is just that
[Amit Varma]: it is it's just an interesting look at the way someone's mind is working. And it's often
[Amit Varma]: more sad, like, I completely agree that we should only judge people by their actions.
[Amit Varma]: Because a lot of the impulses we have are things we probably can't control. You can't
[Amit Varma]: hold people responsible for the impulses or their thoughts, you can only hold them responsible
[Amit Varma]: for what they actually do. So I completely agree there. So the the fascinating aspect
[Amit Varma]: of your book is that it is more than describing a state of the way things are. Intimacy is
[Amit Varma]: describing a way in which a particular world, a particular ecosystem has completely changed
[Amit Varma]: in these times, right? And I keep thinking about how other things have changed. Like
[Amit Varma]: at the start of the episode, I mentioned that I find many resonances with the way you describe
[Amit Varma]: the world of sex work changing with the way I've seen other things change. For example,
[Amit Varma]: you know, one is the fact that the form of so much else was determined by physical restrictions,
[Amit Varma]: right? So why was a song on radio three minutes because the very first sort of long play record
[Amit Varma]: that came out right at the start of the year could hold that big a song later on, it expanded
[Amit Varma]: to holding 40 minutes that became your album length, right? You know, a newspaper is a
[Amit Varma]: particular way because of particular restrictions. How long should an article be? How many articles
[Amit Varma]: you want to fit? Everything is a result of a physical restriction, a printed book, it's
[Amit Varma]: not viable for it to be more than a certain amount of words. So it is a certain amount
[Amit Varma]: of words. And we had normalized all of these physical restrictions, and they have now kind
[Amit Varma]: of fallen apart. And that's one way in which I've seen changes in other spaces. The other
[Amit Varma]: way is the collapse of the mainstream, in the sense that in the media, for example,
[Amit Varma]: you had big newspapers, and there was a consensus on the truth more or less. And that's where
[Amit Varma]: you got all the information from and that mainstream has fallen apart and people are
[Amit Varma]: just getting information plus narratives plus news plus entertainment from all over the
[Amit Varma]: place in a dispersed way. The same thing has happened to music, the same thing will happen
[Amit Varma]: to cinema. In the creator economy, you see more and more of this, where more and more
[Amit Varma]: niches are coming up. And all of this is pretty wonderful. And I was reading your book and
[Amit Varma]: thinking about the old structures of sex work. For example, typically red light areas would
[Amit Varma]: come up near ports or near colonies where there were soldiers. And that was sort of
[Amit Varma]: a physical imperative. And that's where they sort of would be. And where that changed completely
[Amit Varma]: is and it's changed for a number of reasons. One is that cities have kind of gentrified
[Amit Varma]: those neighborhoods for a variety of reasons, for zoning reasons, for moral panic reasons,
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth. And you've described that in your excellent first section where
[Amit Varma]: you talk about like the four phases in Antwerp, how they gradually shifted. The shift in Oslo,
[Amit Varma]: which was very fascinating, where street sex shifted to massage parlors. And then there
[Amit Varma]: were protests against massage parlors because of quote unquote, immoral activities. And
[Amit Varma]: the sex workers protested back and they called themselves happy hookers to give a different
[Amit Varma]: kind of impression. And then eventually the massage parlors went and now it's run out
[Amit Varma]: of flats. And you point out in one place, how your conclusion was that cities are not
[Amit Varma]: necessarily liberal by default, that liberalism has to be negotiated. And similarly, you know,
[Amit Varma]: in your great chapter on Kamathipura, you've spoken about how that gradually declined,
[Amit Varma]: how Kamathipura was a center of so much. There were Mujras, there were these cages where
[Amit Varma]: people would sort of be displayed as it were, and how that demographic changed from sailors
[Amit Varma]: to workers. And you've described the decline there. But what has happened in all of these
[Amit Varma]: cases is something that's happened in these other areas as well, that the old structure
[Amit Varma]: that sex work is in this particular place, it is a particular kind of person who does
[Amit Varma]: sex work, it is a particular kind of person who is a client. And all of these have completely
[Amit Varma]: changed. Now sex work is dispersed. It's not homogenized in any way. Your profile of the
[Amit Varma]: sex worker has changed completely. You have this great chapter early in the book who sells
[Amit Varma]: and who buys, which shows how it is no longer straightforward. You know, you talk about
[Amit Varma]: research from Fortaleza in Brazil, where, you know, the phrase that is used there is
[Amit Varma]: elegant prostitution on the beach. You talk about the four different types of locations
[Amit Varma]: for sex work in Spain. It's all really fascinating. You talk about how it's being professionalized.
[Amit Varma]: Like earlier during this conversation, you spoke about people sometimes ask you for advice.
[Amit Varma]: And I thought that if you give your book to them, they can just turn to page 2021. And
[Amit Varma]: just read about what you've written about escorts and the risk management systems that
[Amit Varma]: they have put in place. It's all laid out there. And this is so incredibly fascinating
[Amit Varma]: to me that now, you know, almost as the rest of the world, there's a democratization, it's
[Amit Varma]: dispersed, it's everything has changed so much. And in many ways, like in the rest of
[Amit Varma]: the world, it's empowered people, it's empowered both people who want to do sex work and people
[Amit Varma]: who are clients. And sometimes it's very hard to decide which is which also given the kind
[Amit Varma]: of transactions that go on. So tell me a little bit about this. And were there aspects of
[Amit Varma]: this which kind of took you by surprise? Because before I read your book, I had never read
[Amit Varma]: about these changes happening in the context of sex work, though, it kind of should have
[Amit Varma]: been obvious because what is happening with say something like OnlyFans, you know, OnlyFans
[Amit Varma]: in a sense did to pornography what I saw happen to people like me in the creator economy,
[Amit Varma]: where the middleman is cut out and the creators are empowered and you know, so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: It's almost like you're documenting this revolutionary change in this book.
[Guest]: It's such a rich world. So I really enjoyed reading of transformations in red light areas
[Guest]: around the world. And they're all saying one thing that globalization has changed the sex
[Guest]: industry, all with local flavors. And so you know, so in that sense, it's a really rich
[Guest]: sort of stew of things that that has come about. And you didn't mention, for example,
[Guest]: the role of regulation, actually, that a place like San Francisco has seen in a period of
[Guest]: create regulation, we saw the rise of street sex work, because it's easier to run away.
[Guest]: If you're doing street sex work, rather than being a brothel and definitely be raided and
[Guest]: you know, taken away, etc. There's also this idea of what is a smart city, what is a world
[Guest]: city, what is, you know, it is a site of entertainment, it is where sexual entertainment should be
[Guest]: available. And so then there's a rebranding, basically, prostitution is being rebranded
[Guest]: as a club good, in a sense, right. So it's integrated with your nightclubs, and your
[Guest]: other lap dancing and your other kinds of sexual entertainment that any world city is
[Guest]: expected to offer. So it fits into that kind of imagination of what a world city should
[Guest]: be. So that's also another change, which is important. Like I said, everything has got
[Guest]: a very local flavor. So it's not in the case of India, only fans, yes, but it's not again
[Guest]: an Indian, I mean, the situation is that Indian women are not really online. I mean, the digital
[Guest]: divide is huge. And those who are online, there are still continued, there are massive
[Guest]: threats to really publicly doing sex work, right. So there is, it is not as empowering,
[Guest]: as it would be for might be for women in other countries at this moment, even though they're
[Guest]: also being threatened with new legislation, like FOSTA, SESTA, there are these new laws
[Guest]: in the US that make it basically, that criminalize doing sex work online, which has reduced.
[Guest]: So lots of sex workers have protested against that and said that, look, now we can't screen
[Guest]: people who are writing to us, etc. And we were, you know, doing, having these online
[Guest]: advertisements, etc. was important for us, it was a way of increasing our safety. But
[Guest]: now we can't do that anymore. And you're absolutely right, that those who couldn't access sex
[Guest]: work earlier, these technological changes have made possible. So the internet has made
[Guest]: it possible. One of my interviewees said that, you know, earlier, it was only either high
[Guest]: class men, you know, upper class men, the zamindars, who had access and the or it was
[Guest]: like laborers. So the middle class men could never really, you know, for many reasons,
[Guest]: including the moral frameworks they were in, they couldn't access sex work. So this is
[Guest]: all rooted in this idea that actually, there's a natural entitlement that men actually should
[Guest]: have to accessing sexual labor. So there is that sort of tinge on these kind of statements.
[Guest]: But yes, it is true that there is increased access to sex work. The local flavor that
[Guest]: I talk about means that actually, in India, we have a mix of the old forms and the new
[Guest]: forms of sex work. So we still have the old traditional forms, we have a red light area,
[Guest]: which is really reduced from what 100,000 sex workers in the 80s and 90s to 1000 sex
[Guest]: workers in recent census data. So that's the kind of out flight, that's the kind of flight
[Guest]: that we have seen away from Kamathipura, from as you said, the different reasons, AIDS raids
[Guest]: and trades, trades being the fact that Kamathipura is a 24 seven operational area. And so lots
[Guest]: of small industries are now located there. So, but the changes in that in the physical
[Guest]: space of Kamathipura are documented through different sources. And the source that I found
[Guest]: most valuable was the photographs that photographer Sudharak always has taken, you know, and he
[Guest]: gave me access to his hard drive and I spent a day at his place and he really took me through
[Guest]: with stories, you know, of the various photographs he's taken. He's been taking photographs since
[Guest]: I think late 80s of Kamathipura. And above all, I think the images that I saw showed
[Guest]: to me Kamathipura as a residential locality. It's where people live their lives. It's where
[Guest]: births happen, marriages happen, deaths happen. And, you know, heartbreaks happen, there's
[Guest]: violence, there's all kinds of very heartbreaking as well as, you know, moments of celebration.
[Guest]: I mean, it's a really evocative journey that I experienced looking at those photos and
[Guest]: they made me really think of what are our sources of data that we actually use to document
[Guest]: these changes that you're talking about, you know, in a place. And, or, you know, and there
[Guest]: are actually legislation, important cases. These are the cultural sort of sources that
[Guest]: one has to look at to understand how the history of sexuality and its regulation in a city.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and you mentioned sort of Kamathipura and there's this excellent passage where you're
[Amit Varma]: quoting Olwe and I'll read that out where, you know, he's talking about how everything
[Amit Varma]: is impermanent. And he says, quote, people do their work and go. Population is floating
[Amit Varma]: and not permanent. Nothing is permanent. You make friends with someone today, she dies
[Amit Varma]: tomorrow of HIV. Very few have been living there for generations. Those who once lived
[Amit Varma]: with their mothers or mothers, mothers have been replaced by floating girls from smaller
[Amit Varma]: towns. So it's a sense of something that is lost in change, just as you know, I had done
[Amit Varma]: an episode on the wives with Sabadewan. And you've also mentioned that the wives of Lucknow
[Amit Varma]: how at one point in time, they used to pay more income tax than anybody, you know, there
[Amit Varma]: was basically the nobility and then there were the wives and then there was everybody
[Amit Varma]: else. And how over time, they were sort of stigmatized. And that's a whole different
[Amit Varma]: story. So it's like there's a disappearing world there. And now there's a disappearing
[Amit Varma]: world here. And now it's a mobile floating gig economy in some ways professionalized,
[Amit Varma]: and very fluid in the sense that, you know, the binaries don't really apply anymore. It's
[Amit Varma]: not that you're either a sex worker or you're not, it's just, you know, fluid for so many
[Amit Varma]: people and all of that. And I kind of found that really fascinating. The other aspect
[Amit Varma]: of the book, you know, in the section four, you talk about, you've titled your section
[Amit Varma]: real meets virtual. And you speak about firstly, casual encounter specialists, as you call
[Amit Varma]: them, and then cruisers, and then you know, men who are servicing female clients, basically.
[Amit Varma]: And the cruisers bit was also very interesting and cruisers really, where you talk about
[Amit Varma]: men who are, you know, servicing female clients, and the tropes that emerged there were so
[Amit Varma]: different from what it would be of the male clients. Like, you know, you quote, one male
[Amit Varma]: sex worker talking about how the only thing the woman wanted was that he'll sit close
[Amit Varma]: to her and she'll have a cup of tea with him. And that's all she wanted, which seems just
[Amit Varma]: this craving for intimacy. And similarly, you know, you talk about how one common thread,
[Amit Varma]: according to these people, is that these women have been neglected, and they just want company.
[Amit Varma]: It's not necessarily sex so much. It's just the human touch in a broader sense. And it's
[Amit Varma]: in this chapter where you also kind of spoke about the Suhagrath fantasy, which is also
[Amit Varma]: sort of moving in a strange kind of way. And in the next chapter, also where you talk about
[Amit Varma]: servicing female clients, you point out that when it comes to male escorts, the supply
[Amit Varma]: is much more than the demand, which is interesting. And this seems to point to inherent differences
[Amit Varma]: in sex work that while it might well be that more and more women are expressing themselves
[Amit Varma]: and are kind of giving themselves a permission to, you know, fulfill a need in this way or
[Amit Varma]: live out a fantasy, it is still very much a case of female sex workers and male clients
[Amit Varma]: and otherwise, it's kind of outliers. So what's your sort of sense of how all of that is evolving?
[Guest]: The first thing when you talked about how dispersed everyone has become in Kamathipura
[Guest]: and you know, the passage you read out about the impermanence of life there is actually
[Guest]: the root of the fact that there is no organized collective in Kamathipura. And that makes
[Guest]: it very difficult to organize and have strong movement in Kamathipura. And I wonder if there
[Guest]: had been a strong collective in Kamathipura, would it have sort of been be such a shadow
[Guest]: of itself as it is now. I feel there would have been different kind of resistance towards
[Guest]: its takeover and its decline. Regarding this cruisers, so the cruisers are those who while
[Guest]: there's, it's really easy to say that these are clients, these are sex workers. In the
[Guest]: case of cruisers, actually, sometimes they offer sex work services, sometimes they pay
[Guest]: for sex work services. Sometimes it's not really sex work per se, it's different kinds
[Guest]: of, you know, sort of intimacies which are being transacted. And so it's very fluid.
[Guest]: There's no clear cut category that one could put these so which is why they're called sort
[Guest]: of the cruisers of the internet highways. And their clients and generally the clients,
[Guest]: the female clients that you've talked about, they are very poignant stories. And I wish
[Guest]: I had, I mean, these are hard secondhand, right? So this is through the male service
[Guest]: providers that I heard these stories, I was not able to access the clients themselves.
[Guest]: And I think that's the thing about research, right? You have to close your research at
[Guest]: a certain point, and hope that someone will pick up from there and then, you know, take
[Guest]: it forward and find those clients and the female sex workers and the male sex workers
[Guest]: and really do more interviews with them really build on that, that opening, go through that
[Guest]: crack and just widen it, widen it. So there's much more thicker knowledge on it. The thing
[Guest]: about female clients that I found interesting was that, you know, the service providers
[Guest]: would keep saying that you have to treat them like a princess. You know, you have to treat
[Guest]: them, you have to respect them, you have to talk to them, you have to really listen to
[Guest]: them. So those kinds of things, which are very gendered in a sense, right? Because it's
[Guest]: like saying that, oh, women don't really they don't really need the sex per se, they want
[Guest]: the emotional stuff around it. But then, it also seemed to be validated by a lot of the
[Guest]: stories that they were saying. Whereas the for the men who were, you know, the female
[Guest]: escort would talk about how you have to make him feel like he's king. So that's its counterpart,
[Guest]: you have to make the man feel like he's king, he's the best lover in the world. He's like
[Guest]: amazing. So you just have to feed that ego. And, but I thought it was interesting, you
[Guest]: know, on one hand, they're saying, you have to make him feel like a king, you have to
[Guest]: treat her like a princess. So the question of more supply than demand when it comes to
[Guest]: male escorts. So I came across the male escort service accidentally, actually, because the
[Guest]: website that I was looking at, they had put up an ad asking to recruit male escorts. So
[Guest]: I had replied saying that I want to do this interview, etc, etc. So they did, they were
[Guest]: nice enough to reply. I never found them again, you know, after that, they had sort of, they
[Guest]: said they don't operate online, because their female clients would not like to go to a website
[Guest]: and find it. This is absolutely different from what the situation is for male clients
[Guest]: who want to go to a website who want to click through who want to select and who want to
[Guest]: for whom it's very legit. It's like a done thing. It's a normalized globalized practice
[Guest]: to go to an escort services agency and, you know, book a service through them. It's very
[Guest]: professionalized, it's discrete, etc, etc. The thing for women clients, the male agency
[Guest]: was like, no, we will not have an internet presence at all. It can only be word of mouth
[Guest]: because there is a question of safety. There's a question of security. We keep advertising
[Guest]: for new escorts because we need to have a turnover because we have to think about privacy
[Guest]: and security of our clients and so on. It was interesting because he said, listen, if
[Guest]: you I mean, you know, you're coming as a researcher, but if you came as a client, we could give
[Guest]: you more information. So, I mean, were you tempted? I must say I was not at that time.
[Guest]: But also that I couldn't find them again. You know, it was a one of those things that
[Guest]: you know, one is in touch for a while and then they clearly they've changed their numbers
[Guest]: or their websites or whatever email IDs, all of that. So, then there are the ethics around
[Guest]: doing research also, right? You can't just skulk around, you can't do sting operation
[Guest]: kind of methods. You have to state on record that there's an ethics committee, of course.
[Guest]: And then you have to state on record that you are here, you are doing research. You
[Guest]: cannot pay for I mean, this is something that is debated often. You don't pay your interviewees
[Guest]: when you're doing academic research, although you might compensate for travel, etc, etc.
[Guest]: But here, you know, there was an expectation of payment also in some cases. So, that also
[Guest]: becomes a bit of a hurdle in actually accessing as many interviewees as you'd like. Yeah,
[Guest]: the thing with male escort services, I think, is that there's a lot of secrecy around it.
[Guest]: And so it's difficult to so I've done I've, I did only one agency interview, I wish I'd
[Guest]: found more. And that's another area where I feel like young researchers or new researchers
[Guest]: should really look at that site too. I feel that the real edgy thing is women as clients.
[Guest]: Who is the client? If we are able to really understand women as clients, we I feel that
[Guest]: we will make some new conceptual headway into really understanding transactional relationships
[Guest]: and sex. Like what, what is it that motivates women to purchase these services? Is it really
[Guest]: what you're, you know, the the loneliness aspect, which is very present in all the voices
[Guest]: that that are there in Intimacy? Or is it desire? Is it fantasy? Is it the need to be
[Guest]: listened to? Is it just touch? I mean, what is it that that is really their motivation,
[Guest]: if we heard it from them? So that was, I mean, I would be hungry to read those kinds of stories.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, I'd be equally hungry. And I think many of they don't necessarily have
[Amit Varma]: to emerge from researchers, they can also emerge from fiction writers, novelists, I
[Amit Varma]: think it's just rich territory. I mean, I was chatting recently with a novelist friend
[Amit Varma]: of mine and he said, My God, India is the best country in the world to be a novelist
[Amit Varma]: because you're just surrounded by so many stories and so much complexity and all of
[Amit Varma]: that. You know, I won't go on about your book anymore, because we could talk for another
[Amit Varma]: seven hours, I feel a little guilty, I've barely scratched the surface of it. But it's
[Amit Varma]: such a rich book, and it's got such such vivid descriptions of this new developing ecosystem
[Amit Varma]: that I think everyone should go out and buy it and read it. And I will certainly read
[Amit Varma]: it again, at leisure. A couple of sort of final questions. I see two contradictory ways
[Amit Varma]: in which you can approach and perhaps be changed by writing a book like this. And one approach
[Amit Varma]: is that all these people that you're meeting or talking to, at some level, the danger that
[Amit Varma]: a researcher or a nonfiction writer faces is that they become instrumental to that person,
[Amit Varma]: I have a story to tell, what story can you give me and you become instrumental in that
[Amit Varma]: sense. And that's obviously something everyone wants to avoid, though it is part of the game,
[Amit Varma]: they are instrumental, but you don't want to think of them as just that. And the other
[Amit Varma]: aspect is that I imagine that after writing a book like this, you must be a different
[Amit Varma]: person and you must be a different person in the opposite direction, where you have
[Amit Varma]: a little more empathy, where there is a stronger human connection with every single person
[Amit Varma]: you meet, especially those who otherwise might have been unseen to you or invisible to you,
[Amit Varma]: just because you've made all these connections, these human connections while writing the
[Amit Varma]: book. So what's that process been like for you? Like it can't be easy, you know, at the
[Amit Varma]: end of the day, we have this book, and it's a smooth book, and it's full of great insights
[Amit Varma]: and great stories. But it can't be easy even at sort of an emotional level to write a book
[Amit Varma]: like this and negotiate these different kinds of connections that you're making and so on.
[Guest]: Yeah, I think the question of your participants being instrumental, you know, and sort of
[Guest]: stepping stones to telling a narrative or a story is always a concern with researchers,
[Guest]: writers, because research is perceived to be extractive, and in many ways it is. But
[Guest]: it's also, you know, you can really work around that by having for yourself a framework within
[Guest]: which you know, you're very transparent and honest with your participants about what it
[Guest]: is you're seeking, what it is you can offer, because a lot of it, a lot of participants
[Guest]: will ask you, what can I get out of this, right? And the truth is that actually, I don't
[Guest]: have anything to offer, except, I mean, you know, reflective space, or, you know, just
[Guest]: an opportunity to dialogue. And when I was doing the research, I didn't know I was going
[Guest]: to write a book, right? So the book happened later. One of the questions actually that
[Guest]: came to me at the launch was that, are you going to share the profits from the book with
[Guest]: your with the with sex workers who you interviewed? And I understand where that question is coming
[Guest]: from, because it's asking about authorship, it's asking about this very question that
[Guest]: it's extractive, you're taking their stories, but what are you giving them in return? And
[Guest]: the thing is that I have been very upfront and transparent about it. Of course, I'm not
[Guest]: making any profits. But beyond that, that's not the point. The point is that what is authorship
[Guest]: and what is co-authorship? You know, when you interview someone, and when you draw on
[Guest]: their experiences, and your own experiences, and weave several experiences together to
[Guest]: really think about something and arrive at something, there are different, I feel that
[Guest]: yes, there are research participants who have contributed to the process. There are other
[Guest]: situations where there is co-authorship, genuine co-authorship, you know, and one does not
[Guest]: put one's name to it. For example, one has written so many things about violence, etc,
[Guest]: etc. But that's the work of many, many minds, you know, which come together to create a
[Guest]: kind of to create work, to create new knowledge. And so there is that distinction that a writer
[Guest]: or a researcher is constantly doing, you know, feminist participatory process demands that
[Guest]: you do that. So I think that is there. It's also true that this, like what, like we were
[Guest]: saying, you know, do you pay your research participants? Do you not? Why would you not
[Guest]: pay for someone's time? But then are they going to say what you they think you want
[Guest]: to hear? What should be the ideal relationship between a researcher and a researchee? Is
[Guest]: there anything beyond just equality and opening yourself up and being transparent, being honest?
[Guest]: That is there more that a researcher can do? And I think the research community does think
[Guest]: about this more and more. But there's the nature of the beast, you know, in a sense.
[Guest]: So that would be my realization over the last two books, I would say. Am I a different person?
[Guest]: Certainly. I am a different person after Mannequin, I would say more so, perhaps because it's
[Guest]: it was it happened at a very impressionable time in life for me. And, you know, it just
[Guest]: became much more empathetic and able to really see nuance and not feel the need to stick
[Guest]: to some part of a debate. Really, it liberated me from a lot of archaic feminist thinking
[Guest]: and enabled me to really have positions of my own, which are very, very based on honest
[Guest]: interaction with people who I had spoken to. In this particular intimate city, I was changed
[Guest]: in the sense that I think I appreciated the city much more. I discovered it was a way
[Guest]: to discover Mumbai. It was a way to discover really an interior life of people and realize
[Guest]: that there are interior lives that we don't know about. We don't often we don't talk about
[Guest]: we don't read about. And it just makes me feel really excited for all the research that
[Guest]: I have yet to do in my life. You know, it just gives you a new understanding that there's
[Guest]: so much more to learn and know and to ask.
[Amit Varma]: Wow. Can't wait to, you know, read the research that you go on to do and the questions you
[Amit Varma]: go on to ask, but also please write that novella about that sack of fur as you eloquently described
[Amit Varma]: it. Finally, you know, to end, give us, me and my listeners, give us some recommendations
[Amit Varma]: in terms of books you love, films you love, music you love, you know, Desert Island books
[Amit Varma]: and films and music for you. I mean, I feel like I've done a disservice to my listeners
[Amit Varma]: by not going a little deeper into these aspects of you like you're a Bharatnatyam dancer,
[Amit Varma]: for example, while doing this book, you tried to learn the Lavani and all of that. So this,
[Amit Varma]: you know, but we'll do a 10 hour episode next time, perhaps and cover those areas. But for
[Amit Varma]: now, you know, what are the books and films and music that mean a lot to you?
[Guest]: Amit, I am a conventional consumer of books and films. I love rom-coms. And yeah, I love
[Guest]: rom-coms. I wish they would make rom-coms like they used to, like a good Notting Hill.
[Amit Varma]: I'm just waiting for someone to...
[Amit Varma]: Or like Pretty Woman, which would help you with your book also.
[Guest]: Pretty Woman, yes. But I mean, you know, there were many, you know, like...
[Amit Varma]: I'm kidding.
[Amit Varma]: Problematic things in Pretty Woman too, but I love Pretty Woman also. So I'm very conventional
[Guest]: in that sense. In terms of books, you know, something I read recently was Arunabha Sinha's
[Guest]: translated version of Mandadevi's autobiography, An Educated Woman in Prostitution, which I
[Guest]: loved, which was a translation of a memoir by a Bengali educated woman in prostitution
[Guest]: as you would have guessed from the title. But it really showed me how, you know, women
[Guest]: in prostitution have been the only ones who have been financially, a group of women who
[Guest]: have been financially independent since forever. And like, you know, you said that you talked
[Guest]: about how they were the highest taxpayers because they were the only group of women
[Guest]: who were actually financially independent. And that book really revealed to me that things
[Guest]: have not changed so much between 18th century Bengal and now because life outside either
[Guest]: marriage or prostitution is impossible for women. It's very challenging. I mean, it's
[Guest]: possible, but it really, the constraints are huge.
[Amit Varma]: Such an incredible quote, life outside marriage and prostitution is impossible for women.
[Guest]: Sorry, carry on.
[Guest]: I also want to recommend Factory Girls by Leslie T. Chang, which is an oldish book,
[Guest]: but it really showed me how young women work in terrible conditions in the factories in
[Guest]: China, but they love every moment of it because it's giving them freedom in different kinds
[Guest]: of ways. In terms of films, I'm trying to think of.
[Amit Varma]: You're a regular mommy buff every year. So you can't pretend you don't watch films.
[Guest]: That's true. I really miss mommy. I needed to come back before I. Someone make a rom
[Guest]: com quick that I can recommend because I can't think of any amazing films I've seen recently.
[Guest]: Gangubai Kathiyawadi, which I watched. So I know you're not a fan of Sanjay Leela Bhansali,
[Guest]: but have you seen Gangubai? I highly recommend you watch Gangubai Kathiyawadi for its emotional
[Guest]: trope. I love emotional films. And that really is the good old tradition of Bollywood. I
[Guest]: mean, that would be a video cassette that would have made the rounds twice over in my
[Guest]: building in Kuwait. I'm sure it was a really. You've been so generous. You've been so generous
[Amit Varma]: today with your time that I feel I owe it to you then to also spend however long that
[Amit Varma]: film is in watching it. So I will watch it once for you and I will not mention to you
[Amit Varma]: what I feel about it, but unless I like it in the unlikely event. I think you'll love
[Guest]: it. Oh, God. She said with a mischievous glint in her eyes. Oh, and one more film that that
[Guest]: I think you should watch is it's an old film, a French film called L.E.L.L.E.S., which has
[Guest]: Juliette Binoche, an actress I love and admire greatly. And it's about she's a journalist
[Guest]: and she goes out to investigate this story about, you know, students who are doing escorting
[Guest]: or providing services on the side and the realization and the changes that it brings
[Guest]: to her life and her relationships. And it's it's quite fantastic. You should watch that.
[Amit Varma]: I can't wait to watch it. And I have to tell you that Juliette Binoche was my first teenage
[Amit Varma]: crush in a sense of a major foreign actress when I saw her in The Unbearable Lightness
[Amit Varma]: of Being. Such a great film directed by Philip Kaufman. And it was co-written by Jean-Claude
[Amit Varma]: Carrire, who also co-wrote three of my favorite films of all time. I don't know if you've
[Amit Varma]: seen them made by Louis Buuel. When he was in his 70s, between 1970 and 1980, he made
[Amit Varma]: these three films before he died. The Phantom of Liberty, Discrete Charm of the Bourgeoisie
[Amit Varma]: and one more whose name I forget now because I'm also growing old, but just masterpieces.
[Guest]: Have you seen The Discrete Charm of the Savarnas? No, what is that? Oh, it's an amazing film.
[Guest]: You have to see it. I don't remember who made it, but it's modeled on The Discrete Charm
[Guest]: of the Bourgeoisie. And it's about, you know, what Savarnas think Dalits should look like.
[Guest]: Wow. It's an amazing film. It's a short film. You should see that as well. I also love Juliette
[Guest]: Binoche. I've had a crush on her forever. That makes two of us. And so Juliette Binoche,
[Amit Varma]: if you're listening to this, and I know many people listen to my podcast, but I'm not sure
[Amit Varma]: it goes quite that far. So Manjima, thank you so much. You've been so generous with
[Amit Varma]: your time and insights today. And thank you also for writing these wonderful books. And
[Amit Varma]: yeah, it's been great. Thank you so much, Amit. It's been amazing.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, check out the show notes, explore rabbit holes
[Amit Varma]: at will. Visit your nearest bookstore online or offline and buy both of Manjima's books,
[Amit Varma]: Ultimate City and Manequin. You can follow Manjima on Twitter at manzibar. That's M-A-N-Z-I-B-A-R-R.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-B-A-R-M-A. You can browse past episodes
[Amit Varma]: of the Seen and the Unseen at seenunseen.in. Thank you for listening.